We are deceiving ourselves with unrealistic expectations.
I would deceive less if I were more realistic.
They would deceive the truth if they were not careful.
He deceived his friends with empty promises.
If you deceive less, you will have more clarity.
They deceived the market with fake products.
I blind myself to criticism when I am confident.
The driver was blinded by the bright light.
We are blinding ourselves to the problems we do not want to face.
I would blind myself less if I were more attentive.
They would blind their enemies with war tactics.
He blinded their vision with hatred.
If you blind yourself less, you will have more understanding.
They blinded themselves to the truth for convenience.
I howl at the moon on lonely nights.
The wolf howled to call his pack.
We are howling in silence to ease the pain.
I would howl more if I were sadder.
They would howl in chorus if they were together.
He howled when he lost everything he had.
If you howl less, you will have more peace.
They howled together under the starry sky.
I amplify my voice to be heard.
The sound was amplified by the speakers.
We are amplifying the message to reach more people.
I would amplify it more if I had a microphone.
They would amplify the campaign if they had more resources.
He amplified the impact with his words.
If you amplify more, you will have more influence.
They amplified the importance of the event.
I boycott products that do not respect the environment.
The store was boycotted by consumers.
We are boycotting companies that do not follow the rules.
I would boycott more if I had more information.
They would boycott the event if they knew about the irregularities.
He boycotted the meeting in protest.
If you boycott more, you will have more power.
They boycotted the launch for ethical reasons.
I colonize my ideas in new projects.
The territory was colonized by explorers.
We are colonizing new markets with our products.
I would colonize more if I had more resources.
They would colonize the land if there was an opportunity.
He colonized the region with determination.
If you colonize more, you will have more control.
They colonized the islands quickly.
I corroborate the evidence with facts.
The theory was corroborated by data.
We are corroborating the allegations with evidence.
I would corroborate more if I had more time to investigate.
They would corroborate the story if they had witnesses.
He corroborated the version presented.
If you corroborate more, you will have more credibility.
They corroborated the accusation with documents.
I dispel fears with courage.
The scare was dispelled quickly.
We are dispelling problems with creative solutions.
I would dispel less if I were calmer.
They would dispel the crisis if they acted quickly.
He dispelled doubt with a smile.
If you dispel more, you will have more confidence.
They dispelled the storm with optimism.
I profess my faith with pride.
The doctrine was professed with fervor.
We are professing our values ​​with conviction.
I would profess more if I had more opportunities.
They would profess the belief if there were more freedom.
He professed his ideals with passion.
If you profess more, you will have more followers.
They professed the truth with courage.
I host events to promote culture.
The tournament was held in the capital.
We are hosting the annual music festival.
I would host more events if I had more support.
They would host the meeting if there was sponsorship.
He hosted the ceremony elegantly.
If you host more, you will have more prestige.
They hosted the competition successfully.
I grill meat on the weekends.
The chicken was grilled to perfection.
We are grilling vegetables for dinner.
I would grill more if I had more time.
They would grill the meat if they knew how to cook.
He grilled the fish on the barbecue.
If you grill more, it will have more flavor.
They grilled the burgers for the party.
I wander the streets in search of inspiration.
The thought has wandered through the mind.
We are wandering aimlessly, but with hope.
I would wander more if I had more freedom.
They would wander the city if it was not late.
He wandered the roads at night.
If you wander more, you will have more clarity.
They wandered the desert in search of answers
I anchor my dreams on solid foundations.
The ship was anchored in the port.
We are anchoring our projects in solid partnerships.
I would anchor more if I had more security.
They would anchor the boat if there was wind.
He anchored the idea with solid foundations.
If you anchor more, you will have more stability.
They anchored hope in new opportunities.
I correct mistakes with learning.
The contract was amended after review.
We are correcting the flaws in the system.
I would correct more if I were more careful.
They would correct the plan if they knew about the mistake.
He amended the proposal with improvements.
If you correct more, you will have fewer problems.
They amended the project before delivery.
I exacerbate my emotions in difficult situations.
The situation was exacerbated by the crisis.
We are exacerbating the challenges with our attitude.
I would exacerbate less if I were calmer.
They would exacerbate the problems if they did not change their stance.
He exacerbated the discussion with his comments.
If you exacerbate less, you will have less stress.
They exacerbated the situation with impulsive decisions.
I teach with passion and dedication.
The professor was a university professor.
We are teaching new subjects this semester.
I would teach more if I had more time.
They would teach the course if there was demand.
He taught for many years.
If you teach more, you will have more experience.
They taught the subject successfully.
I make fun of my own mistakes to learn.
The situation was mocked by everyone.
We are making fun of seriousness to ease the tension.
I would make fun less if I were more serious.
They would make fun of the proposal if they knew the details.
He made fun of the criticism with humor.
If you make fun more, it will have less weight.
They made fun of the challenge with confidence.
I excel in moments of pressure.
The talent was highlighted in the presentation.
We are standing out in the market with innovations.
I would stand out more if I had more opportunities.
They would stand out in the competition if they trained more.
He excelled in the test.
If you stand out more, you will get more recognition.
They stood out in the campaign with creativity.
I incorporate several skills in my work.
The project was included in the action plan.
We are including new technologies in the operations.
I would include more aspects if I had more time.
They would include all the issues if there was more clarity.
He included all the ideas in the final proposal.
If you include more, you will be more successful.
They included the available resources in the planning.
I strengthen ties with old friends.
The relationship has strengthened over time.
We are strengthening partnerships for mutual growth.
I would strengthen relationships if I had more time.
They would strengthen ties if they met more.
He strengthened his connection with his colleagues.
If you strengthen more, you will have more support.
They strengthened their friendship with sincerity.
I vent to friends to ease my mind.
The burden was vented to a friend.
We are venting our frustrations in sincere conversations.
I would vent more if I had someone to talk to.
They would vent their worries if they were heard.
He vented his feelings in a letter.
If you vent more, you will have more peace.
They vented about challenges at work.
I watch for opportunities to grow.
The secret was spied on by curious people.
We are spying on the chances of success.
I would spy more if I were bolder.
They would spy on the opportunities if they were attentive.
He spied on the situation before acting.
If you peek more, you will be more successful.
They peeked at victory from up close.
I set clear goals to achieve my objectives.
The deadline was set in advance.
We are setting new criteria for evaluation.
I would set more conditions if necessary.
They would set the agreement if it was advantageous.
He set the rules of the game.
If you set more, you will be more organized.
They set the details of the contract.
I spoil my children with affection.
The baby was spoiled by the grandparents.
We are spoiling the client with special care.
I would spoil them more if I had more time.
They would spoil their grandchildren if they saw them more.
He spoiled the dog with treats.
If you spoil them more, you will have more affection.
They spoiled the child with toys.
I bark when something is wrong.
The dog barked when he saw the stranger.
We are barking for justice, but no one listens.
I would bark more if I were braver.
They would bark if they saw danger.
He barked to warn his owners.
If you bark more, you will have more protection.
They barked all night.
I worship the wise men for their knowledge.
The idol was worshiped by his followers.
We are worshiping the ancient traditions.
I would worship more if I had more faith.
They would worship the ancestors if they knew their stories.
He worshipped the master with respect.
If you worship more, you will have more wisdom.
They worshipped the culture with devotion.
I dock my boat at the harbor every morning.
The ship was docked safely.
We are docking at the next stop to refuel.
I would dock more often if the sea were calmer.
They would dock the yacht if there was space.
He docked the sailboat skillfully.
If you dock more, you will have more peace of mind.
They docked the cruise ship at its final destination.
I account for all expenses at the end of the month.
The transaction was accounted for in the system.
We are accounting for the company's profits.
I would account for more expenses if I had more precision.
They would account for resources if necessary.
He accounted for errors to correct.
If you account for more, you will have fewer surprises.
They accounted for costs before making a decision.
I engage my team in all projects.
The public was engaged in the campaign.
We are engaging employees with incentives.
I would engage more if I had more time.
They would engage the community if there was more involvement.
He engaged the students with dynamic activities.
If you engage more, you will have more results.
They engaged the team to win the championship.
I hit the punching bag to release stress.
The boxer was hit hard.
We are hitting problems with quick solutions.
I would hit harder if I were stronger.
They would hit the opponent if they had a chance.
He hit the door as he entered.
If you hit harder, you will have more energy.
They hit the obstacle with determination.
I compensate for the losses with hard work.
The company was compensated for the damages caused.
We are compensating the injured customers.
I would compensate more if I had more resources.
They would compensate the victims if necessary.
He compensated those affected by the accident.
If you compensate more, you will have more justice.
They compensated the injured without hesitation.
I radiate happiness when I am with friends.
The light was radiated in the morning.
We are radiating good vibes to everyone.
I would radiate more joy if I had more reasons.
They would radiate energy if there was more sun.
He radiated confidence during the presentation.
If you radiate more, you will have more success.
They radiated hope in difficult times.
I drip water on the plant every day.
The drop dripped slowly from the faucet.
We are dripping sweat in the summer heat.
I would drip more if I had more patience.
They would drip paint on the canvas if they were painters.
He dripped oil on the bicycle chain.
If you drip more, you will have more precision.
They dripped tears when they heard the news.
I centralize my tasks to be more efficient.
Control has been centralized in the main office.
We are centralizing resources to optimize management.
I would centralize more functions if I had more support.
They would centralize the operation if it were feasible.
He centralized the coordination of the project.
If you centralize more, you will have more control.
They centralized decisions in the leadership.
I aim high to achieve my goals.
The bow has been aimed at the target.
We are targeting new markets with our strategy.
I would aim better if I had more training.
They would aim for victory if they had more confidence.
He aimed for the goal and hit it.
If you aim higher, you'll hit higher.
They aimed for the moon and reached the stars.
I prune the plants so they'll grow stronger.
The garden was pruned in the morning.
We're pruning the trees for spring.
I would prune more if I had more tools.
They would prune the orchard if they had more time.
He pruned the bushes with precision.
If you prune more, you'll have a more beautiful garden.
They pruned the plants before winter.
I provide opportunities for the team to grow.
The environment was conducive to innovation.
We are enabling success with our dedication.
I would enable more opportunities if I had more resources.
They would enable change if there was consensus.
He enabled the meeting between the parties.
If you enable more, you will make more progress.
They facilitated the meeting with great effort.
I muddle things when I am nervous.
The thread got tangled in the machine.
We are muddle the process with unnecessary details.
I would muddle less if I were more organized.
They would muddle the situation if they acted on impulse.
He muddled the discussion with confusing arguments.
If you muddle less, you will have more clarity.
They muddle the plans with lack of communication.
I milk the cow every morning.
The milk was milked carefully.
We are milking the goats at the end of the day.
I would milk more if I had more cows.
They would milk the cows if they knew how.
He milked the animal with experience.
If you milk more, you will have more milk.
They milked the cows early today.
I curse bad luck sometimes.
The villain was cursed by everyone.
We are cursing in a low voice out of frustration.
I would curse more if I didn't control myself.
They would curse fate if they weren't so optimistic.
He cursed when he lost the bet.
If you curse less, you will be calmer.
They cursed in chorus after the defeat.
I emigrate in search of better opportunities.
Many people emigrate to find peace.
We are emigrating to places with more work.
I would emigrate sooner if I knew what I know now.
They would emigrate if there was a better offer.
He emigrated in his youth and never came back.
If you emigrate more, you will find new horizons.
They emigrated during the economic crisis.
I taste each dish with attention.
The wine was tasted with enthusiasm.
We are tasting different flavors at the fair.
I would taste more varieties if I could.
They would taste the cheeses if they were not lactose intolerant.
He tasted the coffee with pleasure.
If you taste more, you will learn to appreciate.
They tasted the dishes of the new cuisine.
I harden my heart in difficult times.
Steel has been hardened for greater resistance.
We are hardening the rules to avoid problems.
I would harden less if I were more understanding.
They would harden the legislation if necessary.
He hardened with the hard life.
If you harden more, you will become stronger.
They have hardened the measures to protect everyone.
I atone for my sins in silence.
Mistakes have been atoned for with sacrifice.
We are atoning for past guilt.
I would atone more if I believed more.
They would atone for their failures if they could.
He atoned for his guilt with tears.
If you atone more, you will feel lighter.
They atoned for mistakes in the name of peace.
I incubate new ideas constantly.
The eggs were incubated with care.
We are incubating startups in the lab.
I would incubate more projects if I had more support.
They would incubate companies if there were more resources.
He incubated the invention for years.
If you incubate more, you will have more innovation.
They incubated new technologies in secret.
I overflow with happiness when I am with friends.
The river overflowed after the storm.
We are overflowing with energy at work.
I would be overflowing with more enthusiasm if I were more excited.
They would be overflowing with emotion if they saw the result.
He was overflowing with pride when he saw his son.
If you overflow more, you will have more impact.
They were overflowing with joy during the party.
I unlock the door before I leave.
The safe was unlocked effortlessly.
We are unlocking new business opportunities.
I would unlock it sooner if I had the key.
They would unlock the secret if they knew.
He unlocked the car with a click.
If you unlock more, you will have more access.
They unlocked the mystery of the enigma.
I defame no one, because I value the truth.
The politician was defamed by his opponents.
We are defaming injustices with our denunciations.
I would defame less if I were more ethical.
They would defame the competitor if they wanted to win.
He defamed his colleague out of jealousy.
If you slander less, you will get more respect.
They slandered the company with false rumors.
I pass on the words of wisdom I hear.
The scandal has spread throughout the city.
We are spreading the good news with enthusiasm.
I would spread it more if I had more reach.
They would spread the message if they believed it.
He spread the success on social media.
If you spread it more, you will get more followers.
They spread the news nationwide.
I attribute my victory to hard work.
The profits were taxed by the government.
We are taxing the gains according to the law.
I would tax less if I could.
They would tax more if they knew the truth.
He taxed the assets accurately.
If you tax more, you will have fewer legal problems.
They taxed the inheritances to redistribute wealth.
I hushed up the case to avoid confusion.
The fire was put out by the firefighters.
We are suppressing rumors to keep the peace.
I would suppress less if I were more transparent.
They would suppress the crisis if they were more competent.
He suppressed the scream so as not to be heard.
If you suppress more, you will have more control.
They suppressed the truth to protect their reputation.
I fight for each point with determination.
The championship was fought until the end.
We are competing for the market with new products.
I would compete more if I had more support.
They would compete for the prize if they were prepared.
He fought the election with vigor.
If you compete more, you will have more victories.
They fought for the trophy with great effort.
I focus my attention on the details.
The problem was focused on the meeting.
We are focusing our efforts on growth.
I would focus more if I had fewer distractions.
They would focus on the issue if it was urgent.
He focused the camera on the landscape.
If you focus more, you will have more precision.
They focused the solution on a single point.
I massacre doubts with determination.
The army was massacred in battle.
We are crushing the competition with innovation.
I would crush more challenges if I had more courage.
They would crush their opponents if they were stronger.
He crushed criticism with solid arguments.
If you crush more, you will have more confidence.
They crushed expectations with results.
I stretch my muscles before running.
The training was lengthened for better results.
We are lengthening the sessions for more learning.
I would stretch more if I had more time.
They would lengthen the contract if there was an agreement.
He extended the deadline to complete the task.
If you stretch more, you will have more flexibility.
They lengthened the discussions to reach consensus.
I subtract errors to improve performance.
The number was subtracted incorrectly.
We are subtracting costs to increase profits.
I would subtract less if I knew the impact.
They subtracted the values ​​incorrectly.
He subtracted the sum without checking.
If you subtract less, you will have more accuracy.
They subtracted expenses from the total.
I burst with joy on days of victory.
The rope broke with the weight.
We are breaking the barriers to success.
I would break more challenges if I had more strength.
They would break the obstacle if they were more united.
He broke the door with a kick.
If you break more, you will have more achievements.
They broke expectations with the results.
I sanctify the day of rest with reflection.
The temple was sanctified by the faithful.
We are sanctifying the ancient traditions.
I would sanctify more if I had more faith.
They would sanctify the event if they believed more.
He sanctified the moment with a prayer.
If you sanctify more, you will have more peace.
They sanctified the ritual with devotion.
I limp when I hurt my foot.
The horse limped after the race.
We are limping to finish the marathon.
I would limp less if I exercised more.
They would limp if they had injuries.
He limped to the finish line.
If you limp less, you will have more stamina.
They limped after the accident.
I calm tensions with dialogue.
The conflict was calmed through negotiations.
We are calming the differences between the groups.
I would calm more if I had more patience.
They would calm the situation if they were calmer.
He calmed the children with sweet words.
If you calm more, there will be more harmony.
They calmed the tempers with a fair solution.
I inflate my lungs with fresh air.
The balloon inflated with gas.
We are inflating expectations with promises.
I will swell less if I avoid salt.
They would swell more if they ate poorly.
He swelled with pride when he heard the compliment.
If you swell less, you will be healthier.
They swelled the budget with extra expenses.
I disapprove of irresponsible behavior.
The student failed the exam.
We are disapproving of unfair practices.
I would fail less if I saw more effort.
They would disapprove of the project if it was not feasible.
He disapproved of his colleague's attitude.
If you disapprove less, you will have more support.
They disapproved of the plan due to lack of details.
I award the victory to the team's effort.
The contract was awarded to the best bid.
We are assigning responsibilities among the members.
I would award more tasks if I could trust them.
They would award the bid if they were more competitive.
He awarded the work with strict criteria.
If you award more, you will have more efficiency.
They awarded the prizes according to the rules.
I spread happiness wherever I go.
The fire spread quickly.
We are spreading innovation throughout the company.
I would spread more ideas if I had more support.
They would spread the campaign if it was effective.
He spread the rumor without thinking about the consequences.
If you spread less, you will have more focus.
They spread the project across several regions.
I run over difficulties with courage.
The car ran over the cyclist.
We are running over obstacles with determination.
I would run over fewer obstacles if I was more careful.
They would run over the problem if they acted quickly.
He ran over the rules and was penalized.
If you run over less, you will have more safety.
They ran over the competition with their strategy.
I sterilize the equipment for safety.
The material was sterilized before use.
We are sterilizing the medical instruments.
I would sterilize more often if necessary.
They would sterilize the tools if they knew how.
He sterilized the environment carefully.
If you sterilize more, you will have less infections.
They sterilized everything after the incident.
I mix different styles in my work.
The fabric was mixed with several colors.
We are mixing ideas to create something new.
I would mix more if I had more references.
They would mix cultures if they had more time.
He mixed flavors in the recipe.
If you mix more, you will have more originality.
They mixed techniques to improve the result.
I tune my instrument before playing.
The sound was tuned with precision.
We are fine-tuning the details of the project.
I would tune more if I had more practice.
They would fine-tune the procedures if necessary.
He tuned his voice before the performance.
If you tune more, you will have more harmony.
They fine-tuned the strategies to achieve the goals.
I mutilate fears with courage.
The criminal was mutilated in combat.
We are mutilating the barriers to achieve freedom.
I would mutilate more obstacles if I had more strength.
They would mutilate the enemy if there was war.
He mutilated the tree to make firewood.
If you mutilate less, you will have more preservation.
They mutilated the records to hide the truth.
I influenced the group with my ideas.
The climate influenced the decisions.
We are influencing the company policy.
I would influence more if I had more power.
They would influence the choice if they knew more.
He influenced the choice of the leader.
If you influence more, you will have more impact.
They influenced the final result.
I resonate my emotions when I speak.
The sound resonated throughout the room.
We are resonating the feelings through the music.
I would resonate louder if I had more confidence.
They would resonate the message if they were more involved.
He resonated his voice in the auditorium.
If you resonate more, you will be heard more.
They echoed the melody throughout the hallway.
I switch tasks to vary the pace.
The punishment was commuted to a lesser sentence.
We are switching roles to increase efficiency.
I would switch more if I had more flexibility.
They would switch roles if necessary.
He commuted the sentence with leniency.
If you switch more, you will have more balance.
They switched roles to improve the team.
I downgrade the importance of negative reviews.
The soil has been degraded by erosion.
We are degrading the barriers that limit us.
I would degrade less if I were more positive.
They would degrade the system if it was not protected.
He degraded the quality of the product to reduce costs.
If you degrade less, you will have more sustainability.
They degraded the environment with pollution.
I fly over the city every morning.
The plane flew over the mountain at dawn.
We are flying over the areas affected by the disaster.
I would fly over more if I had more time.
They would fly over the area if they had permission.
He flew over the park before landing.
If you fly more, you will have more panoramic views.
They flew over the forest to monitor the fires.
I give words of encouragement every day.
The speech was delivered with passion.
We are giving votes of confidence to everyone.
I would say more if I knew the impact.
They would speak the truth if they were questioned.
He spoke the words with conviction.
If you say more, you will have more influence.
They made promises that they kept.
I discuss ideas with my colleagues.
The topic has been discussed in depth.
We are discussing the proposals for the project.
I would discuss more if I had more information.
They would discuss the topic if there was time.
He discussed the options with the group.
If you discuss more, you will have more clarity.
They discussed the issue until they reached a consensus.
I leverage the company's growth with innovation.
The investment was leveraged successfully.
We are leveraging market opportunities.
I would leverage more if I had more resources.
They would have boosted the results if they were bolder.
He boosted his career with networking.
If you boost more, you will have more growth.
They boosted the project with new ideas.
I push the limits when necessary.
The budget was exceeded without warning.
We are exceeding the goals with extra effort.
I would have pushed less if I were more cautious.
They would have pushed the numbers if they had more data.
He exceeded the expected results.
If you push less, you will have more control.
They exceeded expectations with their performance.
I feel the fruits to check if they are ripe.
The soil was felt before planting the seeds.
We are feeling the possibilities before deciding.
I would feel more if I knew what to look for.
They would feel the options if they had more time.
He felt the surface to feel the texture.
If you feel more, you will have more certainty.
They felt the ground before starting the work.
I opened the stage with an unforgettable performance.
The theater opened with great enthusiasm.
We are opening new shows to the public.
I would open earlier if I were more prepared.
They would open the play if the scenery was ready.
He opened the film with great success.
If you open more, you will have more experience.
They opened the show to a full house.
I keep my ideas in a notebook.
The refugees were housed in safe shelters.
We are housing the visitors in the main house.
I would house more people if there was space.
They would house the students if there were more dormitories.
He put the family in a hotel.
If you put more, you will have more comfort.
They put the animals in the barn.
I heal my wounds with time.
The cut healed quickly.
We are healing the wounds of the past.
I would heal faster if I was careful.
They would heal the wounds if they used ointment.
He healed the wound effectively.
If you heal more, you will have less pain.
They healed the injuries with proper treatment.
I put off difficult decisions until later.
The project was delayed due to lack of resources.
We are delaying the start of the work until further notice.
I would delay less if I were more decisive.
They would delay the changes if there was no consensus.
He delayed the meeting to gain time.
If you delay less, you will be more efficient.
They delayed the launch of the product due to unforeseen circumstances.
I review the content before the tests.
The case was reviewed in detail in court.
We are reviewing the events of the week.
I would review more if I had more time.
They would review the lesson if necessary.
He reviewed the main points in the meeting.
If you review more, you will have more clarity.
They review the information to fix the learning.
I review the instructions before starting.
The report was passed on for review.
We are passing on the guidelines to the team.
I would pass on less if I trusted them more.
They would pass on tasks if necessary.
He passed on the plan to everyone.
If you pass on more, you will have fewer mistakes.
They passed on responsibilities among themselves.
I consider all possibilities before making a decision.
The project has been taken on by a new team.
We are embracing new challenges with enthusiasm.
I would embrace more if I had more support.
They would embrace the opportunity if they were ready.
He embraced the responsibility without hesitation.
If you embrace more, you will be more successful.
They would embrace the proposal if they knew more.
I register the customers in the system.
The form was registered correctly.
We are registering new members in the community.
I would register more information if I had time.
They would register the products if they had more data.
He registered the event in the calendar.
If you register more, you will have more control.
They registered the participants for the raffle.
I counterattack the criticism with solid arguments.
The attack was successfully counterattack.
We are counterattack the threats with preventive measures.
I would counterattack more if I had more support.
They would counterattack the enemy if they were ready.
He counterattacks the insults with humor.
If you counterattack more, you will have more respect.
They countered the accusations with evidence.
I draw conclusions based on facts.
The answer was inferred by analyzing the data.
We are inferring the causes of the problem.
I would infer more if I had more information.
They would infer the truth if they had more time.
He inferred the reasons accurately.
If you infer more, you will have more certainty.
They inferred the consequences of the decision.
I caused a big impact with my idea.
The mistake caused a big loss.
We are causing important changes in the company.
I would cause fewer problems if I were more careful.
They would cause less confusion if they were clear.
He caused the turnaround in the project.
If you cause fewer, you will have more peace of mind.
They caused an increase in demand with the promotion.
I revive hope in difficult times.
The patient was successfully resuscitated.
We are reviving the team's spirit after the defeat.
I would revive more if I had more energy.
They would revive the group if they had more enthusiasm.
He revived the conversation with a joke.
If you revive more, you will have more motivation.
They cheered up the mood with some good news.
I burp after eating fast.
The baby burped after nursing.
We're burping unintentionally after drinking soda.
I would burp less if I ate slowly.
They would burp if they drank quickly.
He burped loudly during dinner.
If you burp less, you will be more polite.
They burped after the barbecue.
I think before making important decisions.
The problem was reasoned until a solution was found.
We are thinking about the alternatives for the project.
I would think more if I had more time.
They would think about the situation if they were not in a hurry.
He thought about the proposal before accepting.
If you think more, you will have more clarity.
They thought about the strategy before acting.
I pinch the apples to see if they are ripe.
The arm was pinched as a joke.
We are snacking on snacks at the party.
I would snack less if I were more controlled.
They would snack on the sweets if they were not on a diet.
He snacked on the cheese before serving.
If you snack more, you will be less hungry.
They nibbled on the cake before dinner.
I deport criminals who threaten security.
The immigrant was deported for lack of documents.
We are deporting those who do not follow the laws.
I would deport more if I had the authority.
They would deport less if they were more fair.
He deported the alien with a court order.
If you deport more, you will have less problems.
They deported the offenders to their home countries.
I rekindle the flame of hope in difficult times.
The candle was rekindled with care.
We are rekindling family traditions.
I would rekindle the discussion if necessary.
They would rekindle the conversation if it was relevant.
He rekindled the debate with new information.
If you rekindle more, you will have more clarity.
They rekindled interest in the old project.
I resolve doubts with patience.
The problem was resolved quickly.
We are resolving difficulties with innovation.
I would resolve more issues if I had more time.
They would resolve the crisis if there were more resources.
He resolved the flaws in the system.
If you resolve more, you will have fewer problems.
They resolved the obstacles with great effort.
I bathe my dog ​​every Sunday.
The baby was bathed with warm water.
We are bathing the dogs at the shelter.
I would bathe them more often if I had more time.
They would bathe the horses if it was warm.
He bathed the cat gently.
If you bathe more, there will be less dirt.
They bathed the children after playing in the mud.
I disappoint those who expect too much from me.
The dream was disappointed by reality.
We are disappointing expectations with poor results.
I would disappoint less if I were clearer.
They would disappoint the team if they didn't try hard.
He disappointed the fans with his performance.
If you disappoint less, you will have more confidence.
They disappointed the public with empty promises.
I locate my office in the city center.
The company was located in a new building.
We are locating the departments in new areas.
I would locate the headquarters in another neighborhood if possible.
They would locate the factory closer to the suppliers.
He located the store on a busy corner.
If you locate it better, you will have more customers.
They located the branch in a strategic area.
I put on my shoes before I go out.
The feet were shod with leather boots.
We are shoving the children for winter.
I would wear them less tightly if I bought the right size.
They would put on the boots if it were raining.
He put on sneakers to run.
If you wear more comfortable shoes, you will have less pain.
They put on sandals to walk on the beach.
I favor those who work hard.
The customer was privileged with a special discount.
We are privileging quality over quantity.
I would prioritize service more if I could.
They would prioritize long-term partners.
He prioritized honesty in his career.
If you prioritize more, you will have more loyalty.
They prioritized tradition in their choices.
I hesitate when I am not sure.
The team hesitated at the last minute.
We are hesitating in important decisions.
I would hesitate less if I had more information.
They would hesitate in their choice if they were in doubt.
He hesitated when it was time to speak.
If you hesitate less, you will have more confidence.
They hesitated and lost the opportunity.
I suffocate anger with meditation.
The fire was suffocated with sand.
We are suffocating growth with bureaucracy.
I would suffocate less if I took a deep breath.
They would suffocate the crisis if they acted quickly.
He suffocated the problem with practical solutions.
If you suffocate less, you will have more calm.
They suffocated the competition with innovations.
I beautify the house with flowers.
The garden was beautified with new plants.
We are beautifying the neighborhood with paintings.
I would beautify more if I had more creativity.
They would beautify the event if they had more budget.
He beautified the environment with art.
If you beautify more, you will have more joy.
They beautified the party with lights.
I dim the screen to save battery.
The sky darkened before the storm.
We are darkening the photos for more contrast.
I would darken less if there was more light.
They would darken the room if they wanted to watch the movie.
He darkened his hair with dye.
If you darken less, you will have more detail.
They darkened the hallway to create suspense.
I excite my senses with music.
The audience was excited by the presentation.
We are exciting the students with new activities.
I would excite more enthusiasm if I was more lively.
They would excite more if there was more interaction.
He excited the guests with his speech.
If you excite more, you will have more engagement.
They excited the children with fun games.
I do not bother anyone, because I respect everyone.
The animal was bothered as a joke.
We are bothering the ideas to find new solutions.
I would bother less if I were more careful.
They would bother the rules if they were not so strict.
He bothered the neighbor with constant requests.
If you bother less, you will have more peace.
They bothered the passers-by with insistent questions.
I graze with the cattle on the farm.
The field was grazed by the animals.
We are grazing the flock in the meadow.
I would graze more if I had more land.
They would graze the animals if the weather was good.
He grazed the sheep on the hill.
If you graze more, you will have more milk.
They grazed the grass until it was short.
I regularize my accounts every month.
The document was successfully regularized.
We are regularizing the operations to comply with the rules.
I would regularize it faster if I had help.
They would regularize the situation if they knew how.
He regularized the registration in the system.
If you regularize more, you will have fewer problems.
They regularized the processes to avoid fines.
I envy those who have patience.
Success was envied by competitors.
We are envying the luck of the winners.
I would envy less if I were more grateful.
They would envy the rich if they were not content.
He envied his colleague for his promotion.
If you envy less, you will have more peace.
They envied the happiness of others.
I inflame the debates with my opinions.
The wound was inflamed by the infection.
We are inflaming the discussions in the meeting.
I would inflame less if I were more neutral.
They would inflame the speech if they wanted to provoke.
He inflamed the audience with his words.
If you are less inflamed, you will have more harmony.
They inflamed tempers during the match.
I retaliate to insults calmly.
The blow was retaliated with force.
We are retaliating to criticism with positive results.
I would retaliate less if I were more patient.
They would retaliate to the attack if they were prepared.
He retaliated to provocation without hesitation.
If you retaliate less, you will have more peace.
They retaliated to injustice with legal action.
I standardize procedures for greater efficiency.
The standard has been standardized for everyone.
We are standardizing practices in the company.
I would standardize more if I had more time.
They would standardize the rules if necessary.
He standardized the approach for all customers.
If you standardize more, you will have more consistency.
They standardized the processes to avoid mistakes.
I drool with hunger when I see the food.
The baby drooled when he saw the toy.
We are drooling over the desserts in the display case.
I would drool less if I had already eaten.
They would drool more if they saw the banquet.
He drooled from sleep during class.
If you drool less, you will have more control.
They drooled when they saw the main course.
I cripple self-esteem when I am overly critical.
The accident crippled the cyclist.
We are crippling our chances of success with frequent mistakes.
I would cripple less if I were more careful.
They would cripple the project if they did not plan.
He crippled the plant by pruning it incorrectly.
If you cripple less, you will have more growth.
They crippled the team's confidence with harsh criticism.
I amputated the damaged parts of the plant.
The limb was amputated after the accident.
We are amputating losses to save the business.
I would amputate more if I had more courage.
They would amputate the strategy if they saw failures.
He amputated expectations to be more realistic.
If you amputate less, you will have more results.
They amputated expenses to balance the budget.
I sign my books for the readers.
The contract was signed by the representatives.
We are signing copies for the fans.
I would sign more if I had more time.
They would sign the documents if necessary.
He signed the shirt for the fans.
If you sign more, you will have more followers.
They signed the poster for the visitors.
I lose weight with diet and exercise.
The weight was lost with effort.
We are losing weight with a special program.
I would lose more weight if I had more discipline.
They would lose weight if they followed the guidelines.
He lost weight to improve his health.
If you lose more weight, you will have more energy.
They lost weight together as part of a challenge.
I put effort into everything I do.
The commitment was made seriously.
We are putting in all our efforts for success.
I would put in more effort if I had more motivation.
They would put in more effort if there was more encouragement.
He gave his word to keep the agreement.
If you put in more effort, you will get more results.
They put in the time to complete the project.
I embody determination in everything.
The spirit was incarnated in a new body.
We are embodying the company's values ​​in our actions.
I would embody more if I believed more.
They would embody the principles if they were more devout.
He embodied leadership with responsibility.
If you embody more, you will have more success.
They embodied the mission with passion.
I burst into tears when I am sad.
The building collapsed after the earthquake.
We are collapsing under so much pressure.
I would collapse less if I were stronger.
They would collapse the roof if it was not repaired.
He collapsed when he heard the bad news.
If you collapse less, you will have more resilience.
They collapsed in tears during the funeral.
I would date the document to record the event.
The contract was dated and signed.
We are dating the files to organize them.
I would date it sooner if I could.
They would date the evidence for the file.
He dated the letter before sending it.
If you date it sooner, you will have more control.
They dated the photographs to preserve memory.
I decode the messages to better understand.
The code was successfully decoded.
We are decoding the information for the report.
I would decode it faster if I knew the pattern.
They would decode the text if they had the key.
He decoded the riddle in minutes.
If you decode more, you will have more clarity.
They decoded the signals accurately.
I encounter unexpected challenges at work.
The obstacle was encountered during construction.
We are encountering new opportunities in the market.
I would encounter it sooner if I was attentive.
They would encounter problems if they were not prepared.
He encountered a creative solution.
If you encounter more, you will have more learning.
They encountered the truth during the investigation.
I frame the photos to highlight the beauty.
The picture was framed in wood.
We are framing the proposals within the budget.
I would frame more if I had more space.
They would frame the project if possible.
He framed the poster as a keepsake.
If you frame more, you will have more organization.
They framed the documents in specific folders.
I hypnotize the audience with my voice.
The patient was hypnotized to relax.
We are hypnotizing the audience with the presentation.
I would hypnotize more people if I knew how.
They would hypnotize the group if they had more practice.
He hypnotized the room with his speech.
If you hypnotize more, you will have more attention.
They hypnotized the crowd with the spectacle.
I desecrate tradition with new ideas.
The sanctuary was desecrated by invaders.
We are desecrating the old with innovation.
I would desecrate less if I respected more.
They would desecrate memory if they changed everything.
He desecrated the sacred place without thinking.
If you desecrate less, you will have more respect.
They violated the rules to move forward.
I veto suggestions that don't make sense.
The proposal was vetoed by the committee.
We are vetoing inappropriate decisions.
I would veto less if it were more flexible.
They would veto the plan if it wasn't feasible.
He vetoed the idea due to lack of resources.
If you veto less, you will have more collaboration.
They vetoed the project for safety reasons.
I alert everyone when there is danger.
The alarm was activated during the night.
We are alerting the community about the risk.
I would alarm less if I had more certainty.
They would alarm the public if there was a threat.
He alarmed the city with his statements.
If you alarm less, you will have more calm.
They alarmed the authorities with the report.
I highlight the team's achievements.
The success was evidenced by the results.
We are highlighting the qualities of the products.
I would highlight more if I had more data.
They would highlight the weaknesses if necessary.
He highlighted the importance of unity.
If you highlight more, you will get more recognition.
They highlighted the achievements in the presentation.
I downplay the difficulties when I am confident.
The effort was downplayed by the audience.
We are downplaying the obstacles with optimism.
I would downplay less if I were more cautious.
They would downplay the task if they did not know its importance.
He downplayed the competitors and lost.
If you downplay less, you will be more successful.
They downplayed the challenge and could not overcome it.
I dissociate my emotions from the work.
The team was dissociated after the restructuring.
We are dissociating the problems to find solutions.
I would dissociate more aspects if I knew how.
They would dissociate the sectors to improve efficiency.
He dissociated the main idea from the secondary ones.
If you dissociate more, you will have more clarity.
They dissociated the projects to speed up the process.
I familiarize myself with new environments quickly.
The team was familiarized with the new system.
We are familiarizing the employees with the new policies.
I would familiarize more people if I had the time.
They would familiarize customers with the products.
He familiarized the public with the new technology.
If you familiarize more, you will have more confidence.
They familiarized users with the interface.
I suppress my emotions in difficult situations.
The population was oppressed by the authoritarian government.
We are suppressing fears with courage.
I would suppress less if I had more support.
They would suppress the opposition if they had power.
He suppressed the rebels with force.
If you suppress less, you will have more peace.
They suppressed the protesters with violence.
I would crown the team effort with a prize.
The athlete was crowned champion at the event.
We are crowning the project with a big celebration.
I would crown it more often if I had more opportunities.
They would crown the event with a ceremony.
He crowned the work with success.
If you crown more, you will have more recognition.
They crowned the achievement with a party.
I rarely get drunk, only at celebrations.
He got drunk at the party and got sick.
We're getting the guests drunk with wine.
I would get less drunk if I was more careful.
They would get drunk if they had more drinks.
He got his friend drunk with tequila.
If you get drunk less, you'll have more control.
They got the guests drunk at the party.
I congratulate the employees for their excellent work.
He was congratulated by his boss for his success.
We are congratulating the team for their dedication.
I would congratulate them more often if I had more time.
They would congratulate the winners at the ceremony.
He congratulated his colleague on his promotion.
If you congratulate more, you will have more motivation.
They congratulated the students on their graduation.
I calm my thoughts with meditation.
The environment was calm after the confusion.
We are calming the children to sleep.
I would calm down more easily if the environment was calm.
They would calm down if they talked.
He calmed the group with calm words.
If you calm down more, you will have more serenity.
They calmed down their worries with good news.
I crucify my doubts with decisive action.
He was crucified by criticism after the mistake.
We are crucifying the bad ideas to improve the project.
I would crucify less if I were more understanding.
They would crucify the leaders if they were not successful.
He crucified the suggestions of his colleagues.
If you crucify less, you will have more collaboration.
They crucified the plan and opted for another.
I unpack the goods as soon as they arrive.
The gift was unpacked with care.
We are unpacking the new equipment.
I would unpack faster if there was more space.
They would unpack the products for display.
He unpacked the package eagerly.
If you unpack more, you will be more efficient.
They unpacked the books for the library.
I praise the qualities of my friends.
He was praised by his colleagues after the speech.
We are praising the team's achievements.
I would praise the achievements more if I were more recognized.
They would praise the victory with a big party.
He praised the importance of perseverance.
If you praise more, you will have more motivation.
They praised the success of the advertising campaign.
I moderate my opinion to avoid conflict.
He was moderate in his criticism.
We are moderating the tone of the discussions.
I would moderate more if I were more patient.
They would moderate the speech if necessary.
He moderated the conversation to keep the peace.
If you moderate more, there will be more harmony.
They moderated their actions to avoid problems.
I dare to try new ideas in my projects.
He dared to challenge expectations.
We are daring to innovate in the market.
I would dare more if I were less afraid.
They would dare to expand the business in other countries.
He dared to take the risky decision.
If you dare more, you will have more opportunities.
They dared to explore new possibilities.
I re-energize myself with exercise.
He was re-energized after the holidays.
We are re-energizing the team with new hires.
I would re-energize more often if I had time.
They would re-energize the project with new resources.
He re-energized the team with an inspiring speech.
If you re-energize more, you will have more vitality.
They re-energized sales with promotions.
I disagree with traditional opinions in debates.
They disagreed in the meeting about the next step.
We are disagreeing about strategy.
I would disagree less if there was more consensus.
They would disagree if they didn't reach an agreement.
He disagreed with the original plan.
If you disagree less, you will have more unity.
They disagreed on decisions, but they reached a compromise.
I crumble inside when I'm anxious.
The building collapsed after the fire.
We are crumbling based on trust.
I would collapse less if it were safer.
They would collapse the structure if they didn't reinforce it.
He collapsed when he heard the sad news.
If you collapse less, you will have more stability.
They collapsed expectations with the failure.
I bear the responsibilities of the project.
He bore the consequences of the mistake.
We are bearing the costs of the renovation.
I would bear more if I had more resources.
They would bear the losses if they were guilty.
He bore the company's debts.
If you bear more, you will have more credibility.
They would bear the travel expenses.
I drive the screws to fix the shelves.
He bolted the wood to reinforce the structure.
We are bolting the equipment parts.
I would bolt more if I had the proper tools.
They would bolt the gate if it needed extra security.
He bolted the furniture to the wall.
If you bolt more, it will have more stability.
They bolted the stakes to the ground.
I encrypt the data to protect privacy.
The file was encrypted for security.
We are encrypting the communications to prevent leaks.
I would encrypt more information if necessary.
They would encrypt the system to prevent attacks.
He encrypted the message before sending.
If you encrypt more, it will have more protection.
They encrypted the company's sensitive data.
I would punch the wall if I was very angry.
He punched the door in a fit of rage.
We are punching the punching bag to relieve stress.
I would punch less if I were calmer.
They would punch the burglar if they were brave.
He punched the table when he heard the news.
If you punch less, you will have fewer regrets.
They pounded on the doors trying to get in.
I generalize when I don't know the details.
He generalized when he made the criticism.
We are generalizing to simplify the analysis.
I would generalize less if I had more information.
They would generalize the procedures to speed things up.
He generalized the situation without thinking about the nuances.
If you generalize less, you will be more accurate.
They generalized the conclusions, but adjusted them later.
I reread the text to ensure quality.
The book was reread several times before publication.
We are rereading the documents to review the details.
I would reread more if I had more time.
They would reread the contract before signing.
He reread the letter carefully.
If you reread more, you will have more understanding.
They reread the guidelines before starting.
I saw the wood to make furniture.
He sawed the boards for the project.
We are sawing the logs for firewood.
I would saw faster if I had a chainsaw.
They would saw the material to fit it.
He sawed the metal to fit the pieces together.
If you saw more, you will have more accuracy.
They sawed the beams for the construction.
I blink when I'm very tired.
He blinked when he woke up.
We blinked during the long meeting.
I would blink less if I slept better.
They would blink if they stayed up all night.
He blinked several times before answering.
If you blink less, you will have more focus.
They blinked during class, but they managed to pay attention.
I symbolize freedom with a dove.
He symbolized peace with an olive branch.
We are symbolizing renewal with a ceremony.
I would symbolize justice with a scale.
They would symbolize unity with a hug.
He symbolized courage with a lion.
If you symbolize more, you will have more impact.
They symbolized hope with a lit candle.
I scrape my hands working in the garden.
He scraped his knee when he fell.
We are skinning vegetables for soup.
I would skin less if I wore gloves.
They would skin the trees to get the bark.
He skinned the hide when he cleaned it.
If you skin less, you will have fewer wounds.
They skinned the hide to make the bandage.
I polish the shoes to keep them shiny.
He polished the boots before the trip.
We are polishing the leather chairs.
I would polish the furniture if I had more time.
They would polish the car seats to preserve them.
He polished the saddle before he rode.
If you polish more, it will last longer.
They polished the belts for the parade.
I hammer the nails to fix the fence.
He hammered his head when he tripped.
We are hammering the stakes into the ground.
I would hammer more if I were stronger.
They would hammer the metal to shape it.
He hammered the door to get attention.
If you hammer more, you will have more resistance.
They hammered the bars to reinforce the structure.
I precede my speeches with an introduction.
He preceded the event with a lecture.
We are preceding the party with a meeting.
I would precede the show with a brief explanation.
They would precede the meeting with preparation.
He preceded the meeting with a breakfast.
If you precede more, you will have more organization.
They preceded the ceremony with a rehearsal.
I would dye the clothes to renew them.
He dyed his hair to change his look.
We are dyeing the fabrics for the show.
I would dye more if I had more paints.
They would dye the walls to decorate.
He dyed the socks blue.
If you dye more, you will have more colors.
They dyed the scarves for the party.
I sketch my ideas before presenting them.
He sketched the plan on paper.
We are sketching the project for the client.
I would sketch more details if I had more time.
They would sketch the layout before they started construction.
He sketched the painting in a notebook.
If you sketch more, you will have more clarity.
They sketched the guidelines for the meeting.
I mend clothes when they tear.
He mended his jacket so he can wear it again.
We are mending the sails for the boat.
I would mend the shoes if I had a needle and thread.
They would mend the awning to protect it.
He mended the old hat.
If you mend more, it will last longer.
They mended the curtains for the event.
I strategize how to achieve my goals.
He has devised a plan to surprise his friends.
We are devising a surprise for the birthday party.
I would devise a better plan if I had more information.
They would plot an attack if they were enemies.
He has plotted a daring escape.
If you plot more, you will have more control.
They have devised a scheme to gain an advantage.
I loosen the screws to dismantle the furniture.
He loosened his belt after dinner.
We are loosening the rules to make access easier.
I would loosen the guidelines further if necessary.
They would loosen the surveillance to reduce costs.
He has loosened the moorings on the boat.
If you loosen them further, you will have more flexibility.
They have loosened the ties to allow more freedom.
I decorate the house for the holidays.
He has decorated the bedroom with colorful balloons.
We are decorating the living room for the meeting.
I would decorate the party more if I had more time.
They will decorate the hall for the wedding.
He has decorated the cake with sugar flowers.
If you decorate more, you will have more joy.
They decorated the tree with lights.
I despair when I see no way out.
He despaired when he received the bad news.
We are despairing because of the delay in the project.
I would despair less if I had more patience.
They would despair if they knew about the crisis.
He despaired when he lost everything.
If you despair less, you will have more peace of mind.
They despaired when they saw the accident.
I plan my tasks for the day.
He planned the trip in advance.
We are planning the expansion of the company.
I would plan better if I had more data.
They would plan the activities if they had more time.
He planned the event in detail.
If you plan more, you will be more efficient.
They planned the construction before it started.
I rekindle old friendships with meetings.
He rekindled romance with an unexpected gesture.
We are reviving forgotten traditions.
I would revive memories if I had more photos.
They would revive the local culture with festivals.
He rekindled the flame of passion.
If you rekindle more, you will have more joy.
They rekindled the interest in history.
I ease the tension with kind words.
He eased the pain with medicine.
We are easing the impact of the crisis.
I would ease the mood more if I had more support.
They would ease the situation if there was more dialogue.
He eased the argument with a smile.
If you ease more, there will be more harmony.
They eased the differences with an agreement.
I chill the water to make ice.
He chilled the ice cream for dessert.
We are chilling the drinks for the party.
I would chill more if the freezer was bigger.
They would chill the meat to preserve it.
He chilled the dessert before serving.
If you chill more, it will be fresher.
They chilled the fruit for the summer.
I meet old friends at gatherings.
He reunited with his family after years.
We are reuniting with school friends.
I would reunite with more people if I had more time.
They would reunite with their relatives at the party.
He found happiness in his new job.
If you reunite with more people, you will have more happiness.
They reunited with old loves at the event.
I reintegrate employees into work after leave.
He reintegrated the student into the class after recovery.
We are reintegrating employees into the project.
I would reintegrate more people if there was space.
They would reintegrate team members if they were ready.
He reintegrated the data into the system.
If you reintegrate more, you will be more effective.
They reintegrated the files into the database.
I rhyme my songs to give them rhythm.
He rhymed the poem perfectly.
We are rhyming the verses to the music.
I would rhyme more verses if I had more inspiration.
They would rhyme the lyrics to create a melody.
He rhymed the words to create impact.
If you rhyme more, you will have more flow.
They rhymed the lines of the song carefully.
I break down matter to study its parts.
He broke down the substance for analysis.
We are breaking down the elements for research.
I would break down the text if necessary.
They would break down the compound to examine.
He broke down the idea into smaller concepts.
If you break it down more, you will have more understanding.
They broke down the project into steps.
I address the letters to different destinations.
He addressed the package overseas.
We are addressing the problems to solve them.
I would address the packages if I knew the details.
They would address the complaints to the right department.
He addressed the correspondence to the recipient.
If you address more, you will have more precision.
They addressed the complaints to the responsible parties.
I model the objects in clay.
He modeled the sculpture skillfully.
We are modeling the design for the client.
I would model more parts if I had more time.
They would model the prototype before production.
He modeled the concept for presentation.
If you model more, you will have more versatility.
They modeled the details for the final project.
I vaccinate my children every year.
He vaccinated the dog against rabies.
We are vaccinating the population against the flu.
I would vaccinate more people if there were enough vaccines.
They would vaccinate the children in schools.
He vaccinated the cat to prevent diseases.
If you vaccinate more, you will have more immunity.
They vaccinated the elderly in the health campaign.
I fight for better working conditions.
He fought for his rights in court.
We are fighting for a more just society.
I would fight more if there was more support.
They would fight for victory until the end.
He fought to overcome obstacles.
If you fight more, you will have more achievements.
They fought together to achieve the goal.
I get angry when I am wronged.
He got angry when he heard criticism.
We are angry about the delay in service.
I would be less angry if there was more patience.
They would be angry if they knew the truth.
He was angry at the lack of respect.
If you are less angry, you will have more peace.
They were angry at the late delivery.
I roar like a lion when I am angry.
He roared to show authority.
We are roaring as a united team.
I would roar louder if necessary.
They would roar like thunder in unison.
He roared in pain as he fell.
If you roar more, you will have more presence.
They roared with intensity in celebration.
I throw the ball hard.
He threw the stone far away.
We are throwing the dice in the game.
I would throw harder if I had more practice.
They would throw the discus accurately.
He threw the book at the table.
If you throw more, you will have more power.
They shot the arrow at the target.
I nurse the baby until he falls asleep.
He nursed until he was full.
We are nursing the young on the farm.
I would nurse more slowly if it were possible.
They would nurse until they were satisfied.
He sucked the milk greedily.
If you nurse more, you will have more energy.
They nursed all morning.
I refrigerate the food to preserve it.
He refrigerated the drinks for the party.
We are refrigerating the room for comfort.
I would refrigerate more items if I had space.
They would refrigerate the produce to keep it fresh.
He refrigerated the room for the guests.
If you refrigerate more, it will last longer.
They refrigerated the food for the week.
I abbreviate words to save time.
He abbreviated speech to avoid tiring.
We are abbreviating terms to make things easier.
I would abbreviate more texts if it were more efficient.
They would abbreviate the process to save time.
He abbreviated instructions to simplify.
If you abbreviate more, you will be more agile.
They abbreviated speech to speed up the meeting.
I exhume the body for investigation.
He exhumed the remains for analysis.
We are exhuming the evidence to reopen the case.
I would exhume the evidence if necessary.
They would exhume the bodies for identification.
He exhumed the bones for study.
If you exhume more, you will get more clarity.
They exhumed the remains to solve the mystery.
I readjust the plans according to the circumstances.
He readjusted the chair to make it more comfortable.
We are readjusting the prices for the market.
I would readjust the strategies if necessary.
They would readjust the goals to achieve the objective.
He readjusted the camera focus for clarity.
If you readjust more, you will get more precision.
They readjusted the salaries according to the contract.
I derive my ideas from past experiences.
He derived the concept from previous studies.
We are deriving new solutions from old problems.
I would derive the answer if I had more data.
They would derive the formula from complex calculations.
He derived the name from an ancient word.
If you derive more, you will get more creativity.
They derived the style from a mixture of cultures.
I discriminate between what is important and what is not.
He discriminated between options to make it easier to choose.
We are discriminating between relevant information.
I would discriminate more details if I had time.
They would discriminate between people by age.
He discriminated between tasks according to urgency.
If you discriminate more, you will be more organized.
They discriminated between customers based on established criteria.
I resell products to increase profit.
He resold used cars in his store.
We are reselling electronics that are in high demand.
I would resell more items if I had capital.
They would resell the merchandise at a higher price.
He resold the concert tickets.
If you resell more, you will have more revenue.
They resold the stock to maximize return.
I grind the ingredients to make the dough.
He grinded the cookies for dessert.
We are grinding the leaves for tea.
I would grind more food if I had a better grinder.
They would grind the seeds to make oil.
He shredded the paper to throw it away.
If you grind more, you will be more efficient.
They grinded the herbs for the medicine.
I waver between decisions when I am indecisive.
He wavered between accepting or declining the offer.
We are wavering between different strategies.
I would waver less if I had more information.
They wavered between different approaches.
He wavered during the presentation due to nervousness.
If you waver less, you will have more confidence.
They wavered between two options, but chose the best one.
I reappear at meetings when I am needed.
He reappeared at the party after years.
We are re-emerging in the market with new products.
I would re-emerge more often if there were more opportunities.
They would re-emerge on social media with a new campaign.
He suddenly re-emerged in his friends' lives.
If you re-emerge more, you will have more impact.
They re-emerged in the news with news.
I conform my plans to reality.
He conformed expectations to the current situation.
We are conforming actions to the norms.
I would conform more easily if I were more flexible.
They would conform procedures to the new rules.
He conformed the project to the available resources.
If you conform more, you will have more acceptance.
They conformed the structure to the available space.
I decapitate the plants to promote growth.
He decapitated the statue during the protest.
We are decapitating the branches for pruning.
I would decapitate more trees if necessary.
They would decapitate enemies in times of war.
He decapitated the monarch in one coup.
If you decapitate more, you have more control.
They decapitated the statues as a form of protest.
I stank after the marathon, I needed a shower.
He stank of cigarettes after the party.
We stink of sweat after practice.
I would stink less if I had used deodorant.
They would stink up the place if they didn't clean up.
He stunk and bothered everyone on the bus.
If you stink less, you will have more friends.
They stank of fish after fishing.
I plow the land to prepare the crops.
He plowed the field before the rain.
We are plowing the soil for cultivation.
I would plow more land if I had time.
They would plow the land for harvest.
He plowed the garden to plant flowers.
If you plow more, you will have more crops.
They plowed the farm before the season.
I audit the accounts to ensure accuracy.
He audited the company for irregularities.
We are auditing the financials for the annual report.
I would audit more companies if there was a demand.
They would audit the industry to prevent fraud.
He audited the accounts and found discrepancies.
If you audit more, you will have more transparency.
They audited the projects to ensure efficiency.
I water the plants to keep them healthy.
He watered the crops during the drought.
We are watering the fields to increase production.
I would water more if there was an automatic system.
They would water the garden to keep the flowers.
He watered the crops with water from the well.
If you water more, you will have more harvest.
They watered the land to increase production.
I ridicule absurd ideas with humor.
He ridiculed his opponent during the debate.
We are ridiculing the flaws in order to correct them.
I would ridicule less if I were more understanding.
They would ridicule the plans if they were ineffective.
He ridiculed the proposal without considering the benefits.
If you ridicule less, you will have more support.
They ridiculed the project before they understood.
I orchestrate the events to ensure success.
He orchestrated the party masterfully.
We are orchestrating the product launch.
I would orchestrate more if I had more resources.
They would orchestrate the campaign to ensure impact.
He orchestrated the presentation to perfection.
If you orchestrate more, you will have more organization.
They orchestrated the ceremony to ensure fluidity.
I blossom when I am happy.
He blossomed after the promotion at work.
We are blossoming as a united team.
I would blossom more if I had more confidence.
They would blossom as leaders if they were encouraged.
He blossomed as an artist after years of practice.
If you blossom more, you will have more opportunities.
They have blossomed as friends over the years.
I snore loudly when I am tired.
He snored all night, disturbing the others.
We are snoring from exhaustion after training.
I would snore less if I lost weight.
They would snore softer if they used nasal strips.
He snored so much that he woke the dog.
If you snore less, you will get more rest.
They snored like thunder during a storm.
I lay bare the truth when I speak honestly.
He laid bare the secrets during the confession.
We are laying bare the facts to solve the case.
I would lay bare more issues if there was time.
They would lay bare their intentions if they were sincere.
He laid bare their feelings for their beloved.
If you lay bare more, you will have more authenticity.
They laid bare the flaws in the system.
I blind the vision with a bright light.
He blinded the opponent with a surprise blow.
We are blinding weaknesses to appear strong.
I would be less blinding if I were more humble.
They would be more blinding if they were smart.
He dimmed the star's brightness with his presence.
If you dim less, you will have more clarity.
They dimmed the problem with distractions.
I allocate resources to priority projects.
He allocated the budget for the new campaign.
We are allocating time for staff training.
I would allocate more funds if the project was viable.
They would allocate the budget for research if there was more.
He allocated the human resources for development.
If you allocate more, you will have more productivity.
They allocated the materials for construction.
I whip the will to move forward.
He whipped the horse to gain speed.
We are whipping the team to improve performance.
I would whip more if there was a need.
They would whip the workforce to achieve goals.
He whipped the waters to move the boat forward.
If you whip less, you will have more balance.
They whipped the earth to prepare the soil.
I eject negative thoughts to have peace.
He ejected the capsule to escape.
We are ejecting errors to improve.
I would eject more problems if I knew how.
They would eject cargo to save the ship.
He ejected the seat from the plane in danger.
If you eject more, you will have more lightness.
They ejected the passengers to avoid the collision.
I invalidate weak arguments with logic.
He invalidated the contract after the fraud.
We are invalidating the obsolete rules.
I would invalidate less if I were more flexible.
They would invalidate the decisions if they were illegal.
He invalidated the excuse with evidence.
If you invalidate more, you will have more justice.
They invalidated the clauses to renegotiate.
I patent the inventions to secure the rights.
He patented the idea to protect his creation.
We are patenting the innovative designs.
I would patent more if I had more inventions.
They would patent the formulas if they were unique.
He patented the process to avoid copies.
If you patent more, you will have more security.
They patented the product to expand the market.
I choke when I eat too fast.
He choked when he drank water.
We are choking on the amount of work.
I would choke less if I were more careful.
They would choke on their food if they didn't chew well.
He choked on his words during his speech.
If you choke less, you will be more fluid.
They choked on the surprise of the announcement.
I auction off old items to raise money.
He auctioned off the artwork for charity.
We are auctioning off seized property.
I would auction off more items if I had the time.
They would auction off their collection to renew it.
He auctioned off his car to buy a new one.
If you auction off more, you will have more resources.
They auctioned off their antiques for a museum.
I purge bad thoughts to keep the peace.
He purged his addictions with determination.
We are purging mistakes to start over.
I would purge more memories if I could.
They would purge the environment to renew it.
He purged the toxins from his body with a diet.
If you purge more, you will have more purity.
They purged the impurities from the water before drinking it.
I see the horizon when I climb the mountain.
He saw the boat in the distance.
We are seeing new opportunities in the market.

They would see the coast at dawn.
He saw the city after days of traveling.
If you see more, you will have more opportunities.
They saw the problem before it happened.
I tan my skin in the summer.
He tanned his body at the beach.
We are tanning the statues for the park.
I would tan more if I had more time in the sun.
They would tan the pieces to give them a special touch.
He tanned the metal for the sculpture.
If you tan more, you will have more shine.
They tanned the jewelry for the collection.
I hide feelings to avoid conflict.
He concealed his intentions during the negotiation.
We are concealing our flaws to appear perfect.
I would conceal less if I were braver.
They would conceal the truth if it was convenient.
He concealed sadness with a smile.
If you conceal less, you will have more authenticity.
They concealed their mistakes to avoid problems.
I graduate the students at the end of the course.
He graduated from college with honors.
We are graduating seniors this semester.
I would graduate earlier if I had more credits.
They graduate students after finals.
He graduates recruits after training.
If you graduate more, you will get more recognition.
They graduate candidates after the exam.
I sand the surfaces to make them smooth.
He sanded the wood for the project.
We are sanding the walls for painting.
I would sand faster if I had an electric sander.
They would sand the parts to finish them.
He sanded the metal to polish it.
If you sand more, you will have more precision.
They sanded the doors before staining.
I swear when I am angry.
He cursed the reckless driver.
We are swearing in our minds to relieve frustration.
I would swear less if I were calmer.
They would swear if they knew what happened.
He cursed the referee during the game.
If you curse less, you will have more control.
They cursed their opponent after defeat.
I dishonor my principles when I lie.
He dishonored his family with his actions.
We are dishonoring the legacy by ignoring it.
I would dishonor less if I were more true to myself.
They would dishonor the values ​​by not following the rules.
He dishonored the company's name with his behavior.
If you dishonor less, you will have more respect.
They dishonored tradition by breaking it.
I mistreat the plants when I forget to water them.
He mistreat the dog by leaving it tied up.
We are mistreating the environment by polluting.
I would mistreat less if I were more conscientious.
They would mistreat the employees if they were not supervised.
He mistreat the child by yelling at her.
If you mistreat less, you will have more empathy.
They mistreat natural resources without thinking about the consequences.
I restrain my impulses so as not to regret.
He restrained his tears so as not to appear weak.
We are restraining our spending to save money.
I would restrain more if I had more self-control.
They would restrain their actions if they thought about the consequences.
He restrained the urge to respond in anger.
If you restrain more, you will have more peace.
They restrained their emotions to stay calm.
I air ideas in meetings to get feedback.
He aired doubts to clarify.
We are airing suggestions to improve the project.
I would air more questions if I had more time.
They aired problems to find solutions.
He aired his concerns to his boss.
If you air more, you will have more clarity.
They aired the topics during the meeting.
I chatter when I am excited.
He chattered during the trip.
We are chattering about the news.
I would chatter less if I were more reserved.
They would chatter if they were more open.
He chattered nonstop about his adventures.
If you chatter less, you will have more focus.
They chattered all night.
I sweeten the coffee to make it pleasant.
He sweetened his words to seem kind.
We are sweetening the recipe to please everyone.
I would sweeten less if I preferred bitter flavors.
They sweetened life with simple gestures.
He sweetened his speech with compliments.
If you sweeten more, you will have more sympathy.
They sweetened the meal with a special dessert.
I knead the dough to make bread.
He crumpled the paper before discarding it.
We are crumpling the grapes to make wine.
I would crumple less if I were more careful.
They would crumple the leaves to make tea.
He crumpled the hat in the suitcase.
If you crumple less, it will be softer.
They crumpled the fabric when they put it away.
I decimate the insects to protect the plants.
He decimated the ant colony with poison.
We are decimating the pests with pesticides.
I would decimate more quickly if I had a sprayer.
They would decimate the rat population to prevent disease.
He decimated the enemy's resistance with strategy.
If you decimate more, you will have fewer problems.
They decimated the vegetation to make way.
I rejuvenate my skin with daily care.
He rejuvenated after the holidays.
We are rejuvenating the environment with new decorations.
I would rejuvenate more if I had more time to rest.
They would rejuvenate the company with new ideas.
He rejuvenated the team with renewed energy.
If you rejuvenate more, you will have more vitality.
They rejuvenated the organization with new talent.
I thrive when I am motivated.
He thrived as a leader after the promotion.
We are growing as a united team.
I would thrive more if I had more support.
They would thrive in the market if they invested more.
He thrived in competitions as a favorite.
If you thrive more, you will have more achievements.
They thrived in challenges as winners.
I get discouraged when I encounter difficulties.
He got discouraged when he received the news.
We are getting discouraged by the lack of progress.
I would get discouraged less if I had more support.
They would get discouraged if they faced so many barriers.
He got discouraged when he saw the result.
If you get discouraged less, you will have more perseverance.
They got discouraged by negative criticism.
I expand ideas to explore possibilities.
He unfolded the map to find the way.
We are unfolding the problem to find the solution.
I would unfold more alternatives if I had more time.
They would unfold the tasks to make the work easier.
He unfolded the project in stages.
If you unfold more, you will have more clarity.
They unfolded the proposals before deciding.
I devalue money when I spend it without thinking.
He devalued the proposal by ignoring it.
We are devaluing the product by selling it cheap.
I would devalue it less if I were more aware.
They would devalue the property by not taking care of it.
He devalued the colleague's opinion.
If you devalue less, you will have more appreciation.
They devalued the work by not recognizing the effort.
I spill the liquid when I am distracted.
He spilled the glass on the table.
We are spilling the leftovers in the sink.
I would spill less if I were more careful.
They would spill the coffee if the cup was full.
He spilled the soup by accident.
If you spill less, you will have less mess.
They spilled the bucket of water on the ground.
I fertilize the soil to improve the plants.
He fertilized the garden in the spring.
We are fertilizing the crops for a better harvest.
I would fertilize more if I had more resources.
They would fertilize the land if they could.
He fertilized the flowers in the flowerbed.
If you fertilize more, you will have healthier plants.
They fertilized the fields to ensure production.
I monopolize time when I do not share.
He monopolized the discussion in the meeting.
We are monopolizing resources without realizing it.
I would monopolize less if I were more generous.
They would monopolize the market if they could.
He monopolized attention with his presentation.
If you monopolize less, you will have more collaboration.
They monopolized power to control the company.
I obscure the truth when I am not clear.
He obscured the facts in the report.
We are obscuring reality by not facing the truth.
I would obscure less if I were more transparent.
They would obscure information to manipulate the results.
He obscured the issue with complicated terms.
If you obscure less, you will have more understanding.
They obscured the situation to confuse those involved.
I untie the knots to make it easier.
He untied his shoes as he got in.
We are untying the ropes to free the boat.
I would untie less if the knots were tighter.
They would untie the ribbons to open the presents.
He untied his belt after dinner.
If you untie more, you will be more agile.
They untied the package to check the contents.
I get fat when I don't take care of my diet.
He got fat after the holidays.
We are fattening the animals for slaughter.
I would get less fat if I exercised more.
They would get fat quickly if they ate a lot.
He got fat during the winter.
If you get less fat, you will be healthier.
They fattened the pigs for sale.
I levitate the mind with meditation.
He levitated the soul with good deeds.
We are levitating the emotions to a higher state.
I would levitate more if I practiced more.
They would levitate together if they were in tune.
He levitated the spirit with music.
If you levitate more, you will have more peace.
They levitated the environment with serenity.
I decline offers that do not interest me.
He politely declined the invitation.
We are declining inappropriate proposals.
I would decline less if there were more benefits.
They would decline the agreement if it was unfavorable.
He declined the job offer.
If you decline less, you will have more opportunities.
They declined the suggestion due to lack of interest.
I standardize tasks to ensure consistency.
He standardized procedures in the company.
We are standardizing processes to improve efficiency.
I would standardize more if I had more time.
They would standardize operations if they had resources.
He standardized documents to avoid errors.
If you standardize more, you will have more quality.
They standardized services to meet standards.
I harm my health by not taking care of myself.
He harmed assets by neglecting maintenance.
We are violating trust by not keeping our promises.
I would violate less if I were more attentive.
They would violate rights if they did not respect the law.
He damaged the company's reputation with his actions.
If you violate less, you will have more respect.
They violated the system by manipulating it.
I remove bad habits to improve.
He removed the director for misconduct.
We are removing inappropriate practices.
I would remove less if there was more transparency.
They would remove the leader if he failed.
He removed the team member for incompetence.
If you remove less, you will have more stability.
They removed the board for lack of trust.
I work out every day to stay in shape.
He worked out hard at the gym.
We are working out to gain strength.
I would work out more if I had time.
They would work out together if they had a routine.
He worked out to exhaustion.
If you work out more, you will have more energy.
They worked out before work.
I haggle over the price to save money.
He haggled at the grocery store to get a discount.
We are haggling with the salesperson to close the deal.
I would haggle more if I had more patience.
They would haggle over the price if necessary.
He haggled until he got a good price.
If you haggle more, you will save more.
They haggled until they got what they wanted.
I solidify ideas to make them concrete.
He solidified plans for the future.
We are solidifying partnerships for success.
I would solidify more if I had more support.
They would solidify the business if they trusted the market.
He solidified the relationship with respect and love.
If you solidify more, you will have more trust.
They solidified the company's foundation for growth.
I envision the future with optimism.
He envisioned a solution during the meeting.
We are envisioning new possibilities.
I would envision more options if I were more creative.
They would envision success if they tried harder.
He envisioned victory before the game.
If you envision more, you will have more clarity.
They envisioned the problem before they acted.
I defecate daily to maintain health.
He defecated before leaving the house.
We are defecating regularly to avoid problems.
I would defecate better if I had a proper diet.
They would defecate more often if they ate more fiber.
He defecated without difficulty after the meal.
If you defecate more, you will have better well-being.
They defecated without problems after the change in diet.
I handcuff suspects to ensure safety.
He handcuffed the robber at the crime scene.
We are handcuffing prisoners before transport.
I would handcuff less if there was more trust.
They would handcuff inmates to prevent escape.
He handcuffed the accused after confession.
If you handcuff more, you will have more control.
They handcuffed the protesters to contain the situation.
I detail the plans to avoid mistakes.
He detailed the project for the investors.
We are detailing the tasks to make it easier to execute.
I would detail more if there was more time.
They would detail the activities if they needed.
He detailed the strategy for the team.
If you detail more, you will be more accurate.
They detailed the process to ensure success.
I growl when I am angry.

We are growling because of stress.
I would growl less if I were calmer.
They would growl at intruders if they sensed danger.
He growled to ward off the stranger.
If you growl less, you will have more peace.
They growl as a form of defense.
I stun the senses with noise.
He stunned opponents with an unexpected blow.
We are stunning the room with arguments.
I would stun less if I were more patient.
They would stun the audience with revelations.
He stunned the senses with the intensity of the music.
If you stun less, you will have more clarity.
They stunned the room with the announcement.
I camouflage my feelings to protect myself.
He camouflaged his intentions to avoid trouble.
We are camouflaging flaws to save face.
I would camouflage less if I were braver.
They would camouflage the truth if it was convenient.
He camouflaged his emotions during the negotiation.
If you camouflage less, you will be more authentic.
They camouflaged their difficulties to appear stronger.
I coagulate blood with pressure.
He coagulated the fluid quickly.
We are coagulating the fluid for analysis.
I will coagulate faster at low temperatures.
They coagulate milk to make cheese.
He coagulated the serum for separation.
If you coagulate more, the wound will close.
They coagulated the blood to stop the bleeding.
I weaken my health with bad habits.
He weakened the structure by removing support.
We are weakening trust with empty promises.
I will weaken less if I take better care of myself.
They will weaken the system if they do not correct the mistakes.
He weakened the company with bad decisions.
If you weaken less, you will have more results.
They weakened the team with constant changes.
I devastate the forests to make way.
He devastated the region with fire.
We are destroying natural resources without thinking about the future.
I will destroy less if there are alternatives.
They will destroy the economy with this policy.
He destroyed the house with the flood.
If you destroy less, you will have more resources.
They devastated the area with construction.
I clarify the facts to clarify.
He clarified the issue with clear examples.
We are clarifying the doubts to avoid misunderstandings.
I will clarify more if I study more.
They will clarify the problem with investigation.
He clarified the plot of the film for the viewers.
If you clarify more, there will be more understanding.
They clarified the case with new evidence.
I prescribe medicines for my patients.
He prescribed the right medicine for the disease.
We are prescribing effective treatments.
I will prescribe more tests if necessary.
They will prescribe a new therapy for the patient.
He prescribed antibiotics for the infection.
If you prescribe more, there will be more cure.
They prescribed the treatment after the diagnosis.
I delimit tasks for better organization.
He delimited the work area for safety.
We are delimiting responsibilities to avoid conflicts.
I will delimit more clearly at the next meeting.
They will delimit the project boundaries.
He delimited the rules for the competition.
If you delimit more, there will be less confusion.
They delimited the roles in the team for efficiency.
I pawn my assets when I am in difficulty.
He pawned his jewelry to get money.
We are pawning the properties to raise capital.
I will pawn more items if necessary.
They will pawn the property if they do not pay the debt.
He pawned the car as collateral.
If you pawn more, you will have more liquidity.
They pawned the valuables in the crisis.
I socialize with my colleagues to maintain good relationships.
He socialized with his friends at the event.
We are socializing to celebrate achievements.
I will socialize more at parties.
They will socialize at the end of the year.
He socialized with the team after the project's success.
If you socialize more, there will be more unity.
They socialized during the trip.
I flourish with love and care.
He flourished in a welcoming environment.
We are flourishing with everyone's support.
I will flourish more if I have good conditions.
They will flourish in the spring.
He flourished after overcoming difficulties.
If you flourish more, there will be more beauty.
They flourished in the midst of adversity.
I shelter those in need in my home.
He sheltered refugees during the crisis.
We are sheltering the homeless in the shelter.
I will shelter more people if necessary.
They will shelter visitors during the event.
He sheltered friends during the holidays.
If you shelter more, there will be more solidarity.
They sheltered the victims of the tragedy.
I tarnish the image when I criticize without foundation.
He tarnished the reputation of his colleague with gossip.
We are tarnishing the brand by not fulfilling promises.
I tarnish less if I am more fair.
They will tarnish the company if they continue with lies.
He tarnished the project with negative comments.
If you tarnish less, there will be more respect.
They tarnished the public image with scandals.
I untie the knots to make it easier.
He untied his belt when he got home.
We are untying the ropes to free the boat.
I will untie them faster with practice.
They will untie the ribbons to open the presents.
He untied the rope without difficulty.
If you untie more, there will be more fluidity.
They untied the package to check the contents.
I corner the enemy to ensure victory.
He cornered the thief in the alley.
We are cornering the adversaries with our strategy.
I will corner them more efficiently next time.
They will corner the target to capture it.
He cornered the problem with a solution.
If you corner more, there will be more control.
They cornered the threat to neutralize it.
I instigate creativity with challenges.
He instigated debate with a provocative question.
We are instigating innovation with new ideas.
I will instigate more motivation in the team.
They will instigate change with concrete actions.
He instigated the students' curiosity with experiments.
If you instigate more, there will be more progress.
They instigated the revolution with their speech.
I start the project with enthusiasm.
He started the presentation with a captivating introduction.
We are starting the new cycle with hope.
I will start more activities next semester.
They will start the hiring process soon.
He started the construction of the building.
If you start earlier, you will have more time.
They started the campaign successfully.
I season the food with spices.
He seasoned the meat before cooking.
We are seasoning the sauce with fresh herbs.
I will season it more carefully next time.
They will season the soup with special ingredients.
He seasoned the salad with olive oil and vinegar.
If you season it more, it will have more flavor.
They seasoned the dish perfectly.
I bluff in the game to deceive the opponent.
He bluffed in the negotiation to gain an advantage.
We are bluffing to test the reaction.
I will bluff more often if it works.
They will bluff to confuse the opposition.
He bluffed in poker and won the hand.
If you bluff more, you have a better chance of winning.
They bluffed until the end of the game.
I obstruct progress when I don't collaborate.
He obstructed the path with obstacles.
We are obstructing the flow of work with bureaucracy.
I will obstruct less if there is more clarity.
They will obstruct the project if there is no consensus.
He obstructed the passage with furniture.
If you obstruct less, there will be more flow.
They obstructed the exit as a precaution.
I tend to be more productive in the morning.
He tended to be calmer in difficult situations.
We tend to improve with practice.
I would tend to help more if I could.
They would tend to collaborate if there was encouragement.
He tended to avoid confrontation.
If you lean more towards the positive, you will have better results.
They tended to support the final decision.
I air the house every day.
He aired the bedroom after cleaning.
We are airing the space to make it more pleasant.
I will air it more often in the summer.
They will air the living room to receive guests.
He aired his mind with a walk outside.
If you air it more, you will have more freshness.
They aired the space before the meeting.
I correlate the data to find patterns.
He correlated the results with the expectations.
We are correlating the symptoms for an accurate diagnosis.
I will correlate more variables in the analysis.
They will correlate the facts with the evidence.
He correlated the information to reach a conclusion.
If you correlate more, you will have more precision.
They correlated the trends with the market changes.
I democratize access to information for everyone.
He democratized education in the community.
We are democratizing knowledge with digital platforms.
I will democratize more resources in the next project.
They will democratize opportunities for everyone.
He democratized culture with free events.
If you democratize more, there will be more inclusion.
They democratized the decision-making process in the company.
I deny the rumors to avoid misunderstandings.
He denied the accusations with evidence.

I will deny the rumors at the next meeting.
They will deny the story if there is evidence to the contrary.
He has publicly deny the story.
If you deny it more, there will be more transparency.
They have deny the version of events presented by the media.
I drain the water to drain the tank.
He drained the liquid to empty the bucket.
We are draining the excess sauce before serving.
I will drain the oil to reuse it.
They will drain the water from the tank.
He drained the paint to avoid stains.
If you drain more, there will be less waste.
They drained the excess water to avoid overflow.
I hold those involved accountable.
He blamed the employee.
We are assigning tasks to avoid confusion.
I will hold leaders more accountable.
They will blame the process for failures.
He blamed the board for the decision.
If you assign more, there will be more clarity.
They assigned responsibility to the manager.
I enact the laws to maintain order.
He enacted the new legislation in parliament.
We are enacting rules to improve coexistence.
I will enact more standards of conduct.
They will enact the decree soon.
He enacted the company bylaws.
If you enact more, there will be more discipline.
They enacted the new guidelines at the last meeting.
I unlock the door to enter.
He unlocked the car before leaving.
We are unlocking the system to continue work.
I will unlock the cell phone if I forget the password.
They will unlock access to the server.
He unlocked the computer after the error.
If you unlock more, there will be fewer interruptions.
They unlocked the door to facilitate entry.
I challenge the decision when I disagree.
He challenged the election result.
We are challenging the proposal for lack of clarity.
I will challenge the contract if there is an error.
They will challenge the candidate's choice.
He challenged the sentence with an appeal.
If you challenge more, you will have more control.
They challenged the agreement for inconsistencies.
I narrate the story with emotion.
He narrated the adventure in detail.
We are narrating the events for the audience.
I will narrate the next chapter with enthusiasm.
They will narrate the game live.
He narrated the film in an engaging way.
If you narrate more, there will be more engagement.
They narrated the event accurately.
I submerge in water to cool down.
He submerged the object to clean it.
We are submerging the plants to hydrate them.
I will submerge deeper next time.
They will submerge the boat for repairs.
He submerged the head to escape the heat.
If you submerge more, you will have more coolness.
They submerged the bodies to prevent decomposition.
I parade in the samba school.
He paraded on the catwalk with elegance.
We are parading on the main avenue.
I will parade in the next event.
They will parade their new clothes.
He paraded confidently in front of the audience.
If you parade more, you will have more presence.
They paraded in the graduation ceremony.
I shuffle the cards before playing.
He shuffled the documents when organizing them.
We are shuffling the game pieces.
I will shuffle the papers to draw.
They will shuffle the options before the decision.
He shuffled the invitations to choose one.
If you shuffle more, you will have more luck.
They shuffled the numbers for the draw.
I decree the law to fulfill my duty.
He decreed the closing of the schools.
We are decreeing new rules for the condominium.
I will decree the end of the discussion.
They will decree the holiday soon.
He decreed the provisional measure.
If you decree more, there will be more order.
They decreed the quarantine for safety.
I spawn the fish to guarantee the species.
He spawned in the river during the spring.
We are spawning the eggs in the tank.
I will spawn more if the conditions are favorable.
They will spawn in the calm waters.
He spawned near the banks.
If you spawn more, there will be a better chance of survival.
They spawned in the protected area.
I encrypt the data to ensure security.
He encrypted the confidential messages.
We are encrypting the sensitive information.
I will encrypt the files before sending them.
They will encrypt the system to prevent intrusions.
He encrypted the email to protect the content.
If you encrypt more, there will be less risk of leaking.
They encrypted the project data.
I brake the car to avoid accidents.
He braked abruptly at the red light.
We are braking to reduce speed.
I will brake more carefully next time.
They will brake before reaching the curve.
He braked the vehicle to avoid crashing.
If you brake earlier, you will avoid collisions.
They braked before entering the garage.
I will inquire about the details before deciding.
He questioned the suspect during the interrogation.
We are questioning the witnesses to clarify the facts.
I will inquire more information before proceeding.
They will question the accused at the next hearing.
He questioned the witness for more details.
If you inquire further, you will have more clarity.
They questioned those involved in the case.
I lubricate the gears to prevent friction.
He lubricated the bicycle chain.
We are lubricating the machines to improve performance.
I will lubricate the parts before assembly.
They will lubricate the engine before the trip.
He lubricated the door to stop the squeak.
If you lubricate more, there will be less wear.
They lubricated the system to prevent failures.
I wither the flowers by forgetting them in the sun.
He withered the plants by not watering them.
We are wilting the vegetation due to lack of water.
I will wilt less if I take better care of the garden.
They will wilt if they are not watered.
He wilted the bouquet by leaving it out of water.
If you wilt less, you will have more life.
They wilted in the intense heat.
I pay my debts on time.
He paid off the loan early.
We are paying off the bills to avoid interest.
I will pay off the debt next month.
They will pay off the outstanding installments.
He paid off the full amount after the purchase.
If you pay off faster, you will avoid problems.
They paid off the bill before the due date.
I mentor young people in their careers.
He mentored the apprentice during the internship.
We are mentoring students to help them develop.
I will mentor more people if I can.
They will mentor new employees in the company.
He mentored the group during the research.
If you mentor more, there will be more growth.
They mentored the program participants.
I venture into new experiences.
He ventured into the unknown with courage.
We are venturing into uncharted territories.
I will venture more next year.
They will venture on exciting trips.
He ventured into the forest during the vacation.
If you venture out more, you will have more stories.
They ventured into the mountains without fear.
I garden on the weekends.
He gardened the backyard with dedication.
We are gardening to make the space more beautiful.
I will garden more in the summer.
They will garden to relax.
He gardened the community park.
If you garden more, you will have more flowers.
They gardened until sunset.
I rush into impulsive decisions.
He rushed into his choice without thinking.
We are rushing to conclusions without analyzing.
I will rush less if I am more patient.
They will rush if they do not consider all the options.
He rushed into accepting the proposal.
If you rush less, you will have more successes.
They rushed into actions without planning.
I germinate the seeds in the garden.
He germinated the plants in the nursery.
We are germinating the ideas for the new project.
I will germinate in a fertile environment.
They will germinate in good conditions.
He germinated the seedlings carefully.
If you germinate more, you will have more fruits.
They germinated the grains successfully.
I cry out loud for justice.
He cried out for help during the crisis.
We are crying out for social change.
I will cry out louder if necessary.
They will cry out for improvements in the system.
He cried out for peace in his speech.
If you cry out louder, you will be heard.
They cried out for freedom in the streets.
I bother people with constant questions.
He bothered the neighbors with noise.
We are bothering the customers with advertisements.
I will bother less if I respect other people's space.
They will bother the guests insistently.
He bothered the colleagues during the meeting.
If you bother less, it will be more pleasant.
They bothered the tourists with offers.
I rummage through the drawers to find something.
He turned the house upside down looking for clues.
We are turning the place upside down to find the document.
I turn over in bed when I can't sleep.
They turn over to avoid trouble.
He turned over his bag and found the key.
If you turn it over more, you'll have a better chance of finding it.
They turned the store upside down looking for the product.
I pulse with excitement during the show.
He pulsed with joy when he received the news.
We are pulsing with the energy of the crowd.
I will pulse stronger at the next event.
They will pulse with the rhythm of the music.
He pulsed with excitement before the competition.
If you pulse more, you will feel it more intensely.
They pulsed together during the celebration.
I have a hard time believing certain stories.
He had a hard time understanding the explanation.
We are having a hard time solving the problem.
I will have a hard time accepting the new reality.
They will have a hard time forgetting the incident.
He had a hard time getting used to the change.
If you cost less, you will have more time.
They had a hard time completing the project.
I mislead the curious to keep the secret.
He misled the paparazzi with a maneuver.
We are misleading the rivals with strategies.
I will mislead more if necessary.
They will mislead the competitors with tactics.
He misled the police with an unexpected escape.
If you mislead more, you will have more privacy.
They misled the competition with a clever move.
I instill values ​​in children from an early age.
He instilled discipline in students.
We are instilling healthy habits into our routine.
I will instill more trust in the team.
They will instill respect in relationships.
He instilled responsibility in his children.
If you instill more, you will have more impact.
They instilled ethical principles in the company.
I modulate my voice to speak in public.
He modulated his tone to sound calmer.
We are modulating responses to avoid conflict.
I will modulate my communication more.
They will modulate the system to improve performance.
He modulated the radio frequency.
If you modulate more, you will have more control.
They modulated the options to optimize results.
I reactivated old contacts for new opportunities.
He reactivated the account after the block.
We are reactivating the project to continue.
I will reactivate more professional relationships.
They will reactivate the agreement next semester.
He reactivated the training program.
If you reactivate more, you will have more chances of success.
They reactivated the contract after the renegotiation.
I float in the pool to relax.
He floated in the sea effortlessly.
We are floating in the river during the trip.
I will float more on vacation.
They will float in the calm waters of the lake.
He floated to the other side.
If you float more, you will have more peace of mind.
They floated in the waves until dusk.
I incapacitate the opponents with strategy.
He incapacitated the enemy with a blow.
We are incapacitating the system to prevent attacks.
I will incapacitate more resources to maintain control.
They will incapacitate the adversary with tactics.
He incapacitated the vehicle with sabotage.
If you incapacitate more, you will have more power.
They incapacitated the opposition leader.
I deny the requests without justification.
He denied the request for lack of documents.
We are denying the proposals without viability.
I will deny them more quickly in the next analysis.
They will deny the inconsistent petitions.
He denied the appeal for lack of merit.
If you reject more, you will have more agility.
They rejected the review request.
I license the products to expand the market.
He licensed the brand for international use.
We are licensing the patents to protect the innovation.
I license the new production models.
They will license the software for several platforms.
He licensed the technology to strategic partners.
If you license more, you will have more reach.
They licensed the copyrights for new creations.
I give gifts to friends on special dates.
He gave his wife a ring.
We are giving gifts to customers.
I will give gifts to my mother on her birthday.
They will give gifts to the winners of the contest.
He gave toys to his children.
If you give more gifts, you will have more smiles.
They gave gifts to employees at the end of the year.
I subsidize social projects to help the community.
He subsidized the initiative with his own resources.
We are subsidizing educational programs for children.
I will subsidize more community actions.
They will fund the event to promote culture.
He funded the research project.
If you fund more, you will have more social impact.
They funded the public health campaigns.
I freak out when I'm overwhelmed.
He freaked out because of the pressure of work.
We are freaking out because of the tight deadlines.
I will freak out less if I organize my time better.
They will freak out if they don't relax a little.
He freaked out when he received the unexpected news.
If you freak out less, you will have more emotional control.
They freaked out because of the amount of work.
I advocate for the rights of the underprivileged.
He advocated for the workers.
We are advocating for a just cause.
I will advocate more for the interests of the community.
They will advocate for reform of the laws.
He advocated for the most important case of his career.
If you advocate more, you will have more justice.
They advocated for human rights at the conference.
I will arrange the furniture to improve the space.
He adjusted his tie before the meeting.
We are arranging the house for guests.
I will arrange the environment for greater comfort.
They will arrange the layout of the office.
He adjusted the picture on the wall.
If you arrange more, you will have more harmony.
They arranged the seats so everyone can sit comfortably.
I label the boxes for easier organization.
He labeled the documents before filing them.
We are labeling the products for inventory.
I will label more items for better control.
They will label the merchandise for sale.
He labeled the clothes for identification.
If you label more, you will have more efficiency.
They labeled the files for easy access.
I supplement the diet with vitamins.
He supplemented the food with protein.
We are supplementing the training with extra exercises.
I will supplement more nutrients at the next meal.
They will supplement the program with new activities.
He supplemented the study with additional material.
If you supplement more, you will get more results.
They supplemented the course with practical classes.
I steam the skin to open the pores.
He steamed the room to purify the air.
We are steaming the plants to humidify.
I will steam more clothes to prevent wrinkles.
They will steam the room before the event.
He steamed the hair to make it easier to comb.
If you steam more, you will have more freshness.
They steamed the floor to deep clean.
I freak out when things get out of control.
He freaked out with the pressure of work.
We are freaking out with so many responsibilities.
I will freak out less if I stay calm.
They will freak out if they do not get rest.
He freaked out when he discovered the truth.
If you freak out less, you will have more balance.
They freaked out with the unexpected news.
I survive in adverse conditions.
He survived with few resources.
We are surviving despite the difficulties.
I will survive with what I have.
They will survive even in difficult times.
He survived with courage and determination.
If you survive more, you will be stronger.
They survived with the support of the community.
I anesthetize the patient before surgery.
He numbed his arm before the injection.
We are numbing the area for the procedure.
I will numb the area before the operation.
They will numb the patient for the treatment.
He numbed the pain with medication.
If you numb more, you will have less suffering.
They numbed the body part before the surgery.
I gather friends to celebrate.
He gathered the faithful in church.
We are gathering the team to discuss the project.
I will gather more people at the event.
They will gather the members for the meeting.
He gathered the family for dinner.
If you gather more, you will have more unity.
They gathered the students for the lecture.
I contrast the colors to create harmony.
He contrasted the ideas in the presentation.
We are contrasting the opinions to reach a consensus.
I will contrast the nuances more in the painting.
They will contrast the styles to innovate.
He contrasted the light and dark in the photograph.
If you contrast more, you will have more emphasis.
They contrasted arguments to enrich the debate.
I untangle my hair carefully.
He untangled it patiently.
We are untangling the fishing nets.
I will untangle it faster with the right product.
They will untangle the boat ropes.
He untangled the bows before tying them.
If you untangle more, you will have fewer knots.
They sorted out the issues before moving on.
I refinanced the debt to make it easier to pay.
He refinanced the loan with better terms.
We are refinancing the contracts to reduce the interest.
I will refinance the outstanding balance.
They will refinance the mortgage next month.
He refinanced the car after negotiation.
If you refinance early, you will avoid penalties.
They refinanced the debts with the bank.
I grumble when I am unhappy.
He grumbled throughout the assignment.
We are grumbling about the changes at work.
I will grumble less if I am more positive.
They will grumble if they don't like the rules.
He grumbled when he got the news.
If you grumble less, you will have more peace.
They grumbled about the new policy.
I usurp power to control.
He usurped the throne with treason.
We are usurping the rights of the less fortunate.
I will usurp leadership if necessary.
They will usurp control of the company.
He misused the resources for his own benefit.
If you misused less, there will be more justice.
They misused the family inheritance.
I acquit defendants when they are innocent.
He acquitted the accused for lack of evidence.
We are acquitting the guilty without guilt.
I will acquit more cases if there is justice.
They will acquit the defendant in the next trial.
He acquitted the client with solid arguments.
If you acquit more, there will be less unfair punishment.
They acquitted the accused of all charges.
I type documents to keep records.
He typed the report quickly.
We are typing the letters for sending.
I will type the contract for review.
They will type the minutes of the meeting.
He typed the invoice by hand.
If you type more, you will be more efficient.
They typed the old files for digitization.
I marginalize the excluded when I don't include them.
He marginalized his colleagues with his attitude.
We are marginalizing minorities by ignoring them.
I will marginalize less if I am more empathetic.
They will marginalize the different if they don't change their mindset.
He marginalized the group during the meeting.
If you marginalize less, there will be more inclusion.
They marginalized the divergent opinions.
He tuned in to the local radio to hear the news.
We are tuning in to the right channel for the program.
I will tune in to the right frequency later.
They will tune in to the station as soon as they get home.
She immediately sympathized with her new colleagues.
We are sympathizing with the cause of the NGO.
I will sympathize with the idea if it is well presented.
They will sympathize with your proposal, I am sure.
The trainer tamed the horse with patience.
We are taming the dog to live indoors.
I tame the parrot every day so it can talk.
They tamed the wild animal.
The mirror reflected their image clearly.
We are mirroring the contents of the cell phone on the TV.
I mirrored the document to have a copy.
They will mirror the photos in the virtual album.
The priest exorcised the family home.
We are exorcising the inner fears.
I will exorcise my personal demons.
They will exorcise the ghosts of the past.
The truth has been instilled in the heart of the child.
We are infusing new ideas into the project.
I will instill courage in the young people.
They have instilled fear in the people.
The systems have been interconnected for greater efficiency.
We are interconnecting the devices in the house.
I will interconnect the data for easier access.
They have interconnected the communication networks.
The vet neutered the cat this morning.
We are neutering the stray dogs.
I will neuter the animal tomorrow.
They will neuter all the males on the farm.
The car has been waxed and is shining.
We are waxing the living room floor.
I will polish the table after dinner.
They will polish the gym floor.
The project has humanized the care at the hospital.
We are humanizing work relationships.
I will humanize the recruitment process.
They have humanized the company with new policies.
The idea has been materialized in a concrete plan.
We are materializing our dreams.
I will materialize this proposal soon.
They have materialized the concept in the final product.
He scribbled a drawing on the sheet of paper.
We are scribbling ideas for the new project.
I will scribble some notes during the meeting.
They scribble whenever they have an idea.
The soldiers fought bravely in battle.
We are fighting for justice.
I will fight until the end for my rights.
They fought against oppression.
She hummed a soft melody while she worked.
We are humming old songs.
I will hum a song for you.
They hummed during the party.
The contract was successfully consummated.
We are consummating the deal this afternoon.
I will consummate the union of the two groups.
They consummated the agreement between the parties.
The student emulated the teacher's style in the essay.
We are emulating techniques of famous artists.
I will emulate their study method.
They emulated the competition's strategy.
The masseur massaged the patient's back.
We are massaging the muscles after training.
I will massage their feet after walking.
They massaged the athlete before the competition.
The politician reneged on his old promises.
We are reneging on outdated ideas.
I will reneg on this wrong path.
They reneged on the principles they defended.
The boss has subordinated the new team to his orders.
We are subordinating the new employees to the managers.
I will subordinate the interns to the supervisor.
They have subordinated the operation to the head office.
The impact has been cushioned by the suspension system.
We are cushioning the shocks with new materials.
I will cushion the falls with cushions.
They have cushioned the debt over time.
The client has been defrauded by the company.
We are defrauding the market's expectations.
I will defraud their trust if I do not deliver.
They have defrauded the investors with false promises.
The building shook during the earthquake.
We are shuddering at the new revelations.
I will shudder if I hear more details.
They shuddered when they heard the news.
The artist cut up the paper to make collages.
We are cutting out the images for the mural.
I will cut out the most interesting parts.
They cut out the articles from the magazine.
The air conditioning cooled the room quickly.
We are cooling the food in the refrigerator.
I will cool the water for the summer.
They cooled the engines after the race.
The tattoo artist tattooed a rose on the client's arm.
We are tattooing personalized designs on the clients.
I will tattoo my children's names.
They tattooed inspirational phrases.
The plant sprouted strongly after the rain.
We are sprouting new ideas for the project.
I will sprout flowers in the garden in the spring.
They sprouted after the rainy season.
The teacher scored all the students' work.
We are scoring the important events on the agenda.
I will score the most relevant issues.
They scored the negative and positive aspects.
The document assumed the need for changes.
We are assuming that everyone agrees.
I assume that you understand the situation.
They assumed that everything would go well.
The government repudiated the acts of violence.
We repudiate any type of discrimination.
I will repudiate any personal offense.
They repudiated the proposal without hesitation.
The referee blew the whistle to end the game.
We are refereeing soccer matches.
I will referee in the next championship.
They whistled to get attention.
The star shone intensely in the sky.
We are starring in a new TV show.
I will star in an independent film.
They starred in a famous commercial.
The farmer plowed the land for planting.
We are plowing the fields for the next harvest.
I will draft the official document tomorrow.
They recorded the meeting minutes.
The student paraphrased the quote in the assignment.
We are paraphrasing the speech for the newspaper.
I will paraphrase your words in my presentation.
They paraphrased the famous poem.
The driver advanced to avoid traffic.
We are moving up the project schedule.
I will move the meeting up to next week.
They advanced the rent payment.
The employee stamped the document.
We are stamping travelers' passports.
I will stamp all the necessary pages.
They stamped the authorizations.
The director allocated funds for education.
We are allocating resources for public health.
I will allocate part of my salary to charity.
They allocated the profit for investments.
The detective indicted the suspect for the crime.
We are indicting those responsible for the incident.
I would indict anyone involved in the scheme.
They indicted several people in the operation.
The judge summoned the witnesses to testify.
We are summoning the parties for a hearing.
I will summon those involved for clarification.
They summoned the defendants to court.
The blacksmith shod the horse before the competition.
We are shoeing the horses for the parade.
I will shoe the animal early tomorrow.
They shod all the horses on the farm.
The student transcribed the interview for the report.
We are transcribing the speeches for the official document.
I will transcribe today's meeting this afternoon.
They transcribed the lessons for the hearing impaired.
The mother longed for her son's return.
We are longing for a better future.
I will long for graduation day.
They longed for change for years.
The criminal imprisoned the victims in the basement.
We are imprisoning our emotions to avoid suffering.
I will imprison bad feelings.
They imprisoned the hostages until the ransom was paid.
The data was collected for analysis.
We are collecting information from various sources.
I will collect the reports tomorrow.
They collected all the necessary evidence.
The mediator pacified the conflict between the parties.
We are pacifying relations between neighbors.
I will pacify the situation if necessary.
They pacified the region after the conflicts.
The woman gave birth to a beautiful baby.
We are coming up with new ideas for the project.
I will deliver the book next month.
They brought forth the company's new policy.
The track was laid along the road.
We are walking a path to success.
I will forge my own destiny.
They walked through the fields during the hike.
The products were categorized by type.
We are categorizing the documents for easier searching.
I will categorize the files tomorrow.
They categorized the expenses by month.
The rust corroded the metal over time.
We are eroding old paradigms.
I will erode doubts with strong arguments.
They eroded the foundations of the structure.
The tower disintegrated after the explosion.
We are disintegrating old ideas.
I will disintegrate what no longer serves.
They disintegrated the organization from within.
The waste was incinerated safely.
We are incinerating confidential documents.
I will incinerate the hospital waste.
They incinerated the evidence after the crime.
The video was rewound to the beginning.
We are rewinding the old tapes.
I will rewind the recording to better analyze it.
They rewound the film several times.
The flag was hoisted on the highest mast.
We are upholding our ideals.
I will uphold my principles until the end.
They raised the symbols of the revolution.
The artisan embroidered a beautiful design on the towel.
We are embroidering new patterns for the trousseau.
I will embroider the baby's name on the sheet.
They embroidered the initials on the uniforms.
The leader coerced the members into accepting the decision.
We are coercing people into taking sides.
I coerced the group into following the rules.
They coerced their colleagues into participating.
The meeting was canceled at the last minute.
We are canceling appointments for the holiday.
I will cancel the meeting if necessary.
They canceled the medical appointment.
The scientist distilled the alcohol for the experiment.
We are distilling essential oils.
I will distill the herbs to extract the compounds.
They distilled the water for purification.
The dog gnawed on the bone until the end.
We are biting our nails out of anxiety.
I will gnaw on the apple at lunch.
They chewed all the pencils during the exam.
The surgeon sutured the wound with precision.
We are suturing the patients' injuries.
I will suture the cut after cleaning it.
They quickly stitched up the wound.
The exercise toned the muscles.
We are toning our bodies at the gym.
I will tone my legs with this workout.
They toned their arms with weights.
The bear hibernated during the winter.
We are hibernating our systems until summer.
I will hibernate the computer to save energy.
They hibernated during the cold season.
The students provided the necessary information.
We are providing resources for the underprivileged.
I will provide the answers as soon as possible.
They provided the basic needs of the families.
The event led to significant changes in the company.
We are assigning new responsibilities to the leaders.
I will impose consequences on anyone who fails to comply.
They incurred irreparable losses.
The scare frightened the birds.
We are scaring away problems with good actions.
I will banish bad thoughts.
They scared off the thieves with an alarm.
The psychic foresaw the young woman's future.
We foresee difficulties ahead.
I foresee success in the venture.
They foresaw the disaster but could not prevent it.
The boss led the team with mastery.
We are heading a new department.
I will lead tomorrow's session.
They led the company for many years.
The coach timed the athlete's performance.
We are timing the players' performance.
I will time the meeting duration.
They timed the race to the end.
The sun shone on the horizon.
We are shining with joy.
I will shine with the success of the project.
They shone during the celebration.
The wind messed up the papers on the table.
We are disrupting plans with last-minute changes.
I will mess things up if I'm not organized.
They messed up the entire room.
The gardener sprayed water on the plants.
We are spraying perfume in the room.
I will spray some water on the leaves.
They sprayed cologne into the air.
The farmer reaped the wheat from the field.
We are reaping the fruits of our labor.
I will weed the garden.
They harvested the crops before the storm.
The accident deformed the car.
We are deforming the clay to shape something new.
I will deform this piece to fit the space.
They distorted reality with lies.
The architect measured the space for the new project.
We are sizing the furniture for the room.
I will size the frame to fit the wall.
They sized the pieces to fit perfectly.
The contract was signed by both parties.
We are securing a beneficial agreement.
I will assert my position on this issue.
They formed a promising partnership.
The sailor hoisted the boat's sails.
We are lifting materials to the top of the building.
I will raise the flag at the ceremony.
They hoisted the equipment carefully.
The coach demoted the team to the second division.
We are lowering the floor to level the space.
I will lower this wall to expand the room.
They demoted the employee for poor performance.
The painter retouched the artwork.
We are touching up the house's paint.
I will retouch my work before submission.
They retouched the photos before publishing.
The body was buried in the local cemetery.
We are burying painful memories.
I will bury my doubts with this decision.
They buried the past and moved on.
The group gossiped about the new colleague.
We are gossiping about neighborhood news.
I will gossip later with my friend.
They gossiped all night.
The young man immigrated to a different country.
We are moving into a new reality.
I will immigrate to another continent soon.
They immigrated in search of a better life.
The scene frightened the children.
We are scaring our opponents with our strategy.
I will intimidate anyone who threatens my family.
They scared their enemies with their strength.
The bank endorsed the customer's check.
We are endorsing the new administration's policies.
I will endorse your refund request.
They enthusiastically endorsed the proposal.
The soldier shot the target during training.
We are shooting down bad ideas.
I will shoot down the project that doesn't work.
They shot down hopes for an agreement.
The presenter stuttered during the speech.
We are stammering under so much pressure.
I will stammer if I lack confidence.
They stuttered when answering questions.
The government rationed water during the crisis.
We are rationing natural resources.
I will ration energy use at home.
They rationed food during the journey.
The building imploded after the demolition.
We are tearing down barriers that prevent us from advancing.
I will explode this myth with facts.
They imploded the building in a controlled manner.
The system debugged the errors in the code.
We are debugging the project's flaws.
I will debug the program before delivery.
They debugged the system of all bugs.
The cave echoed the sound of the voice.
We are echoing ideas around the world.
I will echo your words in my speech.
They echoed the screams through the corridors.
The choir sang a beautiful song.
We are chanting hymns in honor of the heroes.
I will sing the melody with emotion.
They sang during the ceremony.
The dog stirred up the other dogs in the park.
We are stoking the fire of curiosity.
I will stir the coals in the fireplace.
They stirred up the crowd with their speeches.
The sponge absorbed all the liquid.
We are soaking the bread in the sauce.
I will soak the cloth to clean the stain.
They quickly absorb information.
The car squealed when it braked suddenly.
We are towing illegally parked vehicles.
I will tow the broken car to the shop.
They squealed in surprise at the scene.
The father sensed that something was wrong.
We are sensing a change in the air.
I will sense the danger before it happens.
They sensed the storm's arrival but could not prevent it.
The couple reconciled after the argument.
We are reconnecting old ties.
I will resume interrupted conversations.
They renewed their friendship after years.
The fence surrounded the entire property.
We are circling the lake during the walk.
I will walk around the house to check the security.
They surrounded the camp with torches.
The boy sobbed from crying so much.
We are sobbing because of the sad movie.
I will sob when I remember that farewell.
They sobbed during the emotional speech.
The party allied with a new group.
We are joining forces to face the challenges.
I will align my interests with yours.
They pooled resources for a common project.
The butter softened in the heat.
We are softening the clay to mold.
I will soften her heart with kindness.
They softened the dough before baking.
The sick person wasted away from the illness.
We are wasting away from the lack of support.
I will waste away if I don't find a solution.
They wasted away waiting for justice.
The patient expelled the toxin from their body.
We are expelling the system's residues.
I will expel all negativity from my life.
They expelled bad habits.
The company made a high profit this quarter.
We are profiting more from new sales.
I will make a significant amount this month.
They made millions from the launch.
The hairdresser straightened the client's hair.
We are straightening the fabric folds.
I will smooth the table surface.
They ironed the clothes before leaving.
The young man prepared a surprise for his girlfriend.
We are preparing everything for the party.
I will pack the suitcase for the trip.
They prepared the house to receive guests.
The boat rocked on the rough sea.
We are balancing the accounts for the month.
I will weigh the options before deciding.
They balanced the group's interests.
The baby babbled its first words.
We are mumbling what we don't understand.
I will mumble some excuse.
They mumbled something before leaving.
The investor capitalized on the profits.
We are capitalizing on business opportunities.
I will capitalize on innovative ideas.
They capitalized on the crisis.
The man writhed in pain.
We are twisting the facts to fit the narrative.
I will twist my body in yoga class.
They twisted reality to win.
The bank indexed interest rates.
We are indexing documents to the system.
I will index all the items on the list.
They indexed historical records.
The engineer corrected the project.
We are correcting the errors in the spreadsheet.
I will correct my vote if necessary.
They corrected the airplane's route.
The door creaked when it was opened.
We are groaning with so many complaints.
I will whine if someone steps on my foot.
They whined about the constant noise.
The boy bumped into the table and knocked everything over.
We are bumping into obstacles along the way.
I will run into you later.
They accidentally bumped into the wall.
The thief was gagged by the police.
We are silencing criticism with censorship.
I will gag the villain in the story.
They gagged the hostage before fleeing.
The smudged ink ruined the drawing.
We are blurring bad memories.
I will blur what I don't want to remember.
They blurred the line between right and wrong.
Salaries were equalized among employees.
We are equalizing differences in treatment.
I will equalize workers' rights.
They equalized the conditions for everyone.
The student flipped through the book in search of answers.
We are flipping through old magazines.
I will browse the catalog before choosing.
They flipped through photo albums.
The driver was fined for speeding.
We are fining those who break the rules.
I will fine anyone who breaks the norms.
They fined several violators during the operation.
The seer prophesied the couple's future.
We are prophesying better times.
I will prophesy important changes.
They prophesied the coming of a savior.
The priest anointed the faithful with oil.
We are anointing the new leaders.
I will anoint the altar during the ritual.
They anointed the sick during the ceremony.
The young woman sighed at the sight of the sunset.
We are sighing with relief.
I will sigh with love for you.
They sighed deeply after the decision.
The government amortized part of the debt.
We are amortizing project costs.
I will amortize the installments over the next few months.
They amortized the financial losses.
The clouds cleared after the storm.
We are clearing tensions in the work environment.
I will clear my mind with a walk.
They cleared doubts with clear explanations.
The show dazzled the audience.
We are dazzling the public with special effects.
I would dazzle the judges with my presentation.
They dazzled everyone with their performance.
The wall fortified the city against invaders.
We are strengthening the defense with new resources.
I will fortify my house for greater security.
They fortified the borders.
The inspector stapled the documents to the report.
We are stapling papers for organization.
I will staple the sheets before submitting.
They stapled the evidence to the case.
The athlete limped after the injury.
We are limping after the marathon.
I will limp until I fully recover.
They limped throughout the journey.
The student yawned during the class.
We are yawning with sleep.
I will yawn if this continues.
They yawned while listening to the story.
The population has declined in recent years.
We are decreasing production to adjust to the market.
I will slow down to avoid risk.
They reduced operational costs.
The group mocked the mistakes made.
We are joking about embarrassing situations.
I will laugh at the failures to lighten the mood.
They joked about their own flaws.
The builder rounded the table's edges.
We are rounding numbers to simplify.
I will round the amount for easier change.
They rounded the corners for greater safety.
The athlete rolled up his sleeves before the race.
We are rolling up our pants to cross the river.
I will roll up my sleeves and get to work.
They rolled up their sleeves and prepared for the fight.
The team surrendered to the opponent.
We are summarizing ideas for the new project.
I will summarize the information at the meeting.
They surrendered to difficulties.
The technician repaired the damaged device.
We are fixing the errors in the system.
I will fix the broken clock.
They fixed the program's flaws.
The boy unbuttoned his coat upon entering.
We are unbuttoning buttons before washing.
I will unbutton my shirt to be more comfortable.
They unbuttoned their uniforms after training.
The ship sailed from the port at dawn.
We are setting sail for a new adventure.
I will set sail tomorrow for another city.
They always sail in the summer.
The disease affected many people in the city.
We are making efforts to help the sick.
I will devote all resources to the cause.
They affected the region during the epidemic.
The prisoner languished in the dark cell.
We are wasting away due to lack of resources.
I will languish with longing when you leave.
They languished waiting for justice.
The dancer swayed gracefully on stage.
We are struggling to meet deadlines.
I will sway to the music.
They swayed during the party.
The people rejoiced at the team's victory.
We are rejoicing in the event's success.
I will rejoice if I get the promotion.
They rejoiced after the results were announced.
The plan was successfully completed.
We are finalizing the details of the project.
I will finalize the preparations before the trip.
They have finalized the negotiations.
The baby blew his nose with the help of his mother.
We are blowing the tissues from crying so much.
I will blow my nose before leaving.
They blew hard to unblock it.
The system has computed the data accurately.
We are computing the students' responses.
I will compute the test results.
They have computed all the necessary information.
The manager has assigned the intern to the task.
We are assigning more responsibilities to the leaders.
I will assign my team to complete the project.
They have assigned the employees to organize the event.
The lawyer has reached an agreement between the parties.
We are in talks with new partners.
I will make an offer that cannot be refused.
They have drawn up an action plan.
The employee has been relieved of his position.
We are relieving responsibilities to focus on the essentials.
I will resign from my commitments to dedicate myself to the project.
They dismissed the old directors.
The group had lunch in the park during the afternoon.
We are having lunch together at the company.
I will have lunch before leaving for work.
They had sandwiches at the meeting.
The company nationalized foreign products.
We are nationalizing production to reduce costs.
I will nationalize services to benefit the country.
They nationalized the company's operations.
The boy sulked when he was contradicted.
We are sulking because we were not invited.
I will sulk if no one listens to me.
They sulked when they lost the game.
The vehicle traveled on the dirt road.
We are transitioning to a new business model.
I will travel through the city during the week.
They crossed the border without problems.
The bricklayer cemented the floor of the porch.
We are cementing the foundations for the new building.
I will cement the cracks in the wall.
They cemented the entrance to the garage.
The pharaoh was embalmed after his death.
We are embalming ancient traditions.
I will embalm the memory of that moment.
They embalmed the king's body.
The priest took communion with the faithful during the mass.
We are sharing ideas for the common good.
I will take communion from the sacred bread.
They took communion from the host during the ceremony.
The wind snatched her hat from her head.
We are capturing hearts with our music.
I would capture everyone's attention with this proposal.
They snatched victory at the last minute.
The hair was bleached by the sun.
We are whitening the walls of the room.
I will whiten the teeth with this treatment.
They whiten clothes with bleach.
The prisoner was confined to an isolated cell.
We are confining animals for treatment.
I will confine my emotions so they don't show.
They confined the sick in quarantine.
Access has been cleared after the cleaning.
We are clearing the entrances for greater security.
I will clear the path to the end of the trail.
They have cleared the passage on the road.
The grapes fermented in the oak barrel.
We are fermenting the bread for dinner.
I will ferment the dough for tomorrow.
They have fermented the wine by hand.
The thief stole the lady's purse.
We are stealing time to rest.
I will steal a moment to reflect.
They stole the jewelry from the store.
The patient was hospitalized after the accident.
We are admitting the patient for intensive care.
I will admit my grandmother for tests.
They admitted the addict for rehab.
The plane glided smoothly before landing.
We are gliding ideas for the new project.
I will soar above the clouds soon.
They glided during the flight.
The cook spiced up the soup.
We are spicing up the conversation with funny stories.
I will spice up the dish with extra pepper.
They spiced up the discussion with provocations.
The wound was cauterized by the doctor.
We are cauterizing the small bleedings.
I will cauterize the cut to stop the bleeding.
They cauterized the injury to prevent infection.
The customer paid a large amount for the product.
We are paying more than expected.
I will pay the full amount up front.
They paid everything on the credit card.
The iron has rusted over time.
We are rusting the old ideas.
I will rust if I don't practice more.
They rusted the equipment with lack of use.
The towel was dried quickly.
We are drying the tears after the news.
I will dry the sweat after the race.
They dried their hands before leaving.
The teacher exemplified the concept with a graph.
We are exemplifying with real cases.
I will exemplify with practical examples.
They exemplified the theory with demonstrations.
The criminal was extradited to his country of origin.
We are extraditing the fugitive to answer for the crimes.
I will extradite the suspect as soon as possible.
They extradited the terrorist to international justice.
The athlete flexed his muscles before the event.
We are flexing our arms during warm-up.
I will flex my legs to increase strength.
They flexed their joints to avoid injury.
The bank mortgaged the house to secure the loan.
We are mortgaging our properties to expand the business.
I will mortgage the house to get the money.
They mortgaged assets to finance the project.
The columnist opined on the controversial topic.
We are giving opinions on the proposed reforms.
I will give my opinion at tomorrow's meeting.
They gave opinions based on concrete data.
The adult relearned to walk after the accident.
We are relearning to appreciate the little things.
I will relearn to trust people.
They relearned life's lessons.
The player was a starter in all matches.
We are giving titles to the championship winners.
I will title the article with an impactful phrase.
They titled the project "Innovation".
The country regressed in various social indicators.
We are regressing in environmental issues.
I will regress if I don't keep studying.
They regressed after the economic crisis.
The cat purred with contentment.
We are purring with joy at this achievement.
I will purr if I get some affection.
They purred in response to the affection.
The fabric was softened with softener.
We are softening the leather to make shoes.
I will soften the clothes before wearing them.
They tenderized the meat for the barbecue.
The rain calmed the dust on the path.
We are calming anxiety with meditation.
I will calm my anger with patience.
They calmed the pain with natural remedies.
The driver honked to warn pedestrians.
We are honking to get attention.
I will honk if someone cuts me off in traffic.
They honked nonstop in the traffic jam.
The belt was loosened after lunch.
We are loosening the screws to dismantle the machine.
I will loosen the laces before resting.
They loosened the belts before getting out of the car.
The government decentralized decisions to the states.
We are decentralizing operations for greater agility.
I will decentralize control to improve management.
They decentralized administration to give more autonomy.
The student was careless during the exam and made a mistake.
We are neglecting our responsibilities.
I will neglect my health less.
They neglected security and were robbed.
The apartment was vacated after the lease ended.
We are vacating the furniture for the move.
I will vacate the room for the new tenant.
They vacated the building before the renovation.
The protester waved the flag proudly.
We are wielding the ideas of freedom.
I will wield the sword of justice.
They held up signs during the protest.
The bottles were bottled at the factory.
We are bottling the harvest's wine.
I will bottle the fresh juice.
They bottled the oil for sale.
The stock was stored in the warehouse.
We are stocking up on food for the winter.
I will stockpile building materials for the construction.
They stocked up on water and supplies for emergencies.
The idol was worshipped by fans.
We are idolizing celebrities without reason.
I will idolize my parents forever.
They idolized the leader as a hero.
The sofa was covered with new fabric.
We are lining the walls with thermal insulation.
I will reupholster the furniture to match the decor.
They tiled the floor with ceramic.
The rivals competed in a fierce contest.
We are competing for first place.
I will compete with the best in the field.
They competed for years before uniting.
The warrior fought bravely.
We are fighting for our rights.
I will fight until I achieve my goals.
They fought in bloody battles.
The group blasphemed against injustices.
We are blaspheming against oppression.
I will blaspheme if necessary.
They blasphemed in the face of absurdity.
The body was cremated after the ceremony.
We are cremating the remains.
I will cremate if that is my will.
They cremated the loved one according to their wishes.
The territories were divided after the treaty.
We are dividing the areas for better administration.
I will divide the company into smaller units.
They split the group into independent cells.
The author clearly expressed his ideas.
We are stating the principles of the new management.
I will state my objectives at the next meeting.
They stated the rules of the game before starting.
The behavior corrupted the community's values.
We are corrupting customs with new practices.
I will corrupt myths to show the truth.
They corrupted ancient traditions.
The water gushed from the fountain with force.
We are gushing new ideas for the project.
I sweated during the workout.
They gushed with joy at the news.
The solution remained at the end of the discussion.
We have few alternatives left.
I will stick with the available options.
They were left alone after the event.
The businessman took precautions against potential problems.
We are preparing the team for emergencies.
I will prepare my family to avoid risks.
They took precautions and avoided the tragedy.
The hall was decorated with flowers.
We are decorating the party with thematic decorations.
I will decorate the table with candles and flowers.
They adorned the church for the wedding.
The behavior embarrassed those present.
We are embarrassing everyone with this behavior.
I will embarrass anyone who offends me.
They embarrassed the speaker with tough questions.
The present was unwrapped enthusiastically.
We are unwrapping Christmas presents.
I will unwrap the surprises at the end of the party.
They unwrapped the packages as soon as they arrived.
The situation angered the crowd.
We are angering critics with our decision.
I will anger my opponents if necessary.
They were enraged by the unexpected news.
The balloon inflated quickly with air.
We are inflating the car tires.
I will inflate the ball before the game.
They inflated expectations with exaggerated promises.